<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>Irish Ecclesiastical Record, Volume 1, May 1865</title>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>March 21, 2012</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">39226</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
      <language id="he"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2012-03-21">March 21, 2012</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Bryan Ness, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
            (This file was produced from  images generously made available by
            The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries.)
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Irish Ecclesiastical Record</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Volume 1</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">May 1865</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>


<pb n='353'/><anchor id='Pg353'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The See Of Derry.</head>

<p>
The territory of Cineal-Eoghain, from a very early period,
formed a distinct diocese, which took its name from the church
of Arderath, now Ardstraw, situated on the River Derg, and
founded by St. Eugene, first bishop of this see. In the synod
of Rathbreasail, an. 1110, it is called <q>Dioecesis Ardsrathensis</q>
though probably in that very year the city of Derry was chosen
for the episcopal residence. <q>Sedes Episcopalis</q>, writes Dr.
O'Cherballen, bishop of the see in 1247, <q>a tempore limitationis
Episcopatuum Hyberniae in villa Darensi utpote uberiori et
magis idoneo loco qui in sua Dioecesi habeatur, extitit constituta</q>.
For some years this arrangement continued undisturbed, till the
appointment of Dr. O'Coffy, who about the year 1150 transferred
his see to Rathlure, a church dedicated to St. Luroch; and subsequently,
for one hundred years, we find the see designated
<q>Dioecesis Rathlurensis</q>, or <q>de Rathlurig</q>, under which name
it appears in the lists of Centius Camerarius.
</p>

<p>
Dr. Muredach O'Coffy was a canon regular of the order of St.
Augustine, and <q>was held in great repute for his learning, humility,
and charity to the poor</q>&mdash;(Ware). The old Irish annalists
style him <q>the sun of science; the precious stone and resplendent
gem of knowledge; the bright star and rich treasury of
learning; and as in charity, so too was he powerful in pilgrimage
and prayer</q>. He assisted at the Synod of Kells, which was convened
by Cardinal Paparo in 1152, and in the catalogue of its
bishops he is styled from the territory occupied by his see, <hi rend='italic'>the
Bishop of Cineal-Eoghain</hi>. His death is marked in our annals
on the 10th of February, 1173/4.
</p>

<p>
Amlaf O'Coffy succeeded the same year, and is also eulogized
<pb n='354'/><anchor id='Pg354'/>
by our annalists as <q>a shining light, illuminating both clergy and
people</q>. He was translated to Armagh in 1184, but died the
following year. Our ancient records add that <q>his remains were
brought with great solemnity to Derry and interred at the feet
of his predecessor</q>.
</p>

<p>
Florence O'Cherballen next governed the see, from 1185 to
1230; whilst the episcopate of his successor, Friar German
O'Cherballen, embraced well nigh half a century, extending
from 1230 to his death in 1279. It was during the administration
of this last-named bishop that the episcopal see was once
more definitively fixed in Derry. The Holy See, by letter of
31st May, 1247, commissioned the Bishop of Raphoe, the Abbot
of the monastery of SS. Peter and Paul in Armagh, and the
Prior of Louth, to investigate the reasons set forth by Dr. Germanus
for abandoning the church of Rathlure. The following
extract from the Papal letter preserves to us the chief motive
thus alleged by Bishop Germanus:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>Cum villa Rathlurensis pene sit inaccessibilis propter montana,
nemora et paludes, quibus est undique circumcincta, aliasque propter
sterilitatem ipsius et necessariorum defectum nequeat ibi dictus Episcopus
vel aliquis de suis canonicis residere, nec clerus ejusdem dioecesis
illuc convenire ad synodum et ad alia quae saepius expedirent
praefatus episcopus nobis humiliter supplicavit ut utilitatibus Rathlurensis
Ecclesiae, ac cleri ejusdem misericorditer providentes sedem
ipsam reduci ad locum pristinum Darensem villam videlicet de benignitate
Sedis Apostolicae faceremus</q>&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>Mon. Vatic.</hi> pag. 48).
</quote>

<p>
It was also added by Dr. O'Cherballen, that his predecessor,
O'Coffy, had himself been born in Rathlure, and that it was
through love for his native district he had, by his own authority,
transferred the episcopal seat from Derry to Rathlure (illectus
natalis soli dulcedine transtulit motu propriae voluntatis).
</p>

<p>
The appointed deputies approved of the resolution taken by
Bishop Germanus, and a few years later (1254), in reply to the
Chapter of Derry, the same Pope Innocent IV. thus confirmed
this translation of the see:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>Cum, sicuti ex tenore vestrae petitionis accepimus, sedes Anichlucensis<note place='foot'>The reader must not be surprised at the name thus given to the See of
Derry. Camden cites, from an ancient Roman Provinciale, the name <hi rend='italic'>Rathlucensis</hi>
given to this see (Publications of I. A. S., 1843, pag. 61), and O'Sullivan Beare more
than once designates the town of Derry by the Latin name <hi rend='italic'>Lucas</hi>, and styles its
bishop <q>Dirii vel Luci Episcopus</q>&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>Hist. Cath.</hi>, pag. 77, et passim).</note>
Ecclesiae de speciali mandato nostro et assensu etiam
venerabilis fratris nostri Archiepiscopi Armachani loci metropolitani
ad Darensem Ecclesiam sit translata, nos vestris supplicationibus inclinati
translationem hujusmodi, sicut provide facta est, et in alicujus
<pb n='355'/><anchor id='Pg355'/>
praejudicium non redundat, ratam et firmam habentes, eam auctoritate
Apostolica confirmamus. Datum Neapoli, secundo Nonas Novembris,
Pontificatus nostri anno duodecimo</q>&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, 64).
</quote>

<p>
By a previous letter he had, as early as the first of July in the
fourth year of his pontificate, in anticipation of this translation
of the see, granted to the chapter of the diocese of Derry the
same privileges, indulgences, and other special favours which it
had hitherto enjoyed in Rathlure (<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>, pag. 48).
</p>

<p>
The successor of Bishop Germanus was Florence O'Cherballen,
who held the see from 1279 to 1293. Five other bishops then
came in rapid succession. Henry of Ardagh, from 1294 to 1297;
Geoffry Melaghlin, from 1297 to 1315; Hugh or Odo O'Neal,
from 1316 to 1319; Michael Melaghlin, from 1319 to about
1330; and Maurice, from about 1330 to 1347.
</p>

<p>
On the death of the last-named bishop, a Dominican, by name
Symon, was appointed by Pope Clement VI. to rule the See of
Derry. He had indeed already been nominated by brief, dated
the 5th of the Ides of May, 1347, to the diocese of Clonmacnoise,
but the aged and infirm bishop of that see, who was reported to
have passed to a better life, was not yet deceased, and hence, on
the vacancy of Derry, Bishop Symon was, by brief of 18th December,
1347, appointed successor of St. Eugene. From the
first brief, which nominated him to Clonmacnoise, we learn that
Friar Symon was Prior of the Dominican fathers of Roscommon,
and was remarkable for his zeal, his literary proficiency, and his
manifold virtues. The brief of his appointment to Derry adds
the following particulars:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>Dudum ad audientiam apostolatus nostri relatione minus vera
perlata, quod Ecclesia Cluanensis per obitum Venerabilis fratris nostri
Henrici Episcopi Cluanensis qui in partibus illis decessisse dicebatur,
vacabat: Nos credentes relationem hujusmodi veram esse, de te
ordinis fratrum Praedicatorum professore eidem Ecclesiae duximus
providendum, praeficiendo te illi in Episcopum et pastorem: et subsequenter
per Ven. fratrem nostrum Talayrandum Episcopum Albanensem
tibi apud sedem Apostolicam fecimus munus consecrationis
impendi. Cum autem sicut postea vera relatio ad nos perduxit praefatus
Henricus tempore provisionis hujus modi ageret, sicut agere dignoscitur,
in humanis, tu nullius Ecclesiae Episcopus remansisti. Postmodum
vero Ecclesia Darensi, per obitum bonae memoriae Mauricii
Episcopi Darensis qui extra Romanam curiam diem clausit extremum,
pastoris solatio destitute, Nos ... cupientes talem eidem
Darensi Ecclesiae praeesse personam quae sciret, vellet et posset
eam in suis manutenere juribus ac etiam adaugere, ipsamque
praeservare a noxiis et adversis, post deliberationem quam super his
cum fratribus nostris habuimus diligentem, demum ad te consideratis
grandium virtutum meritis, quibus personam tuam Dominus
insignivit, convertimus oculos nostræ mentis, etc. Datum Avinione
<pb n='356'/><anchor id='Pg356'/>
XV. Kalend. Januarii Pontif. Nostri anno octavo</q>&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>Mon. Vatic.</hi>,
pag. 292).
</quote>

<p>
Bishop Symon seems to have held the see till the close of this
century, and the next bishop that we find was John, Abbot of
Moycoscain, or <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de claro fonte</foreign>, who was appointed to Derry by
brief of Pope Boniface IX. on 19th August, 1401. Of his immediate
successors we know little more than the mere names.
William Quaplod, a Carmelite and a distinguished patron of
literary men, died in 1421. Donald for ten years then ruled the
diocese, and resigned in 1431; his successor, John, died in 1456.
A Cistercian monk, named Bartholomew O'Flanagan, next sat
in the see for five years; and Nicholas Weston, a canon of
Armagh, who was consecrated its bishop in 1466, held it till his
death in 1484.
</p>

<p>
Donald O'Fallon, an Observantine Franciscan, was advanced
to this see by Pope Innocent VIII. on the 17th of May, 1485:
<q>he was reckoned a man of great reputation in his time for
learning, and a constant course of preaching through all Ireland,
which he continued for full thirty years</q>&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>Ware</hi>). He died in
the year 1500.
</p>

<p>
James Mac Mahon is the first bishop whose name appears in
the sixteenth century. He was Commendatory Prior of the
Abbey of SS. Peter and Paul, at Knock, in the county Louth,
and died in December, 1517.
</p>

<p>
William Hogeson, which is probably a corruption of the Irish
name <hi rend='italic'>O'Gashin</hi>, was appointed his successor by Pope Leo X. on
8th of August, 1520. He belonged to the order of St. Dominic,
and seems to have administered the see till 1529.
</p>

<p>
Roderick or Rory O'Donnell, Dean of Raphoe, was chosen by
Pope Clement VII., on 19th September, 1529, to occupy the
see of Derry. This bishop was very much opposed to the religious
innovations which Henry VIII. endeavoured to introduce
into the Irish Church. In the <hi rend='italic'>State Papers</hi> (vol. i. pag. 598)
there is a letter dated 14th March, 1539, and addressed by Lord
Cromwell to the English king, in which the following eulogy is
passed on Dr. O'Donnell: <q>Also there be letters long from an
arrant traitor, Rorick, Bishop of Derry, in your grace's land of
Ireland, his hand and great seal at it, to the Bishop of Rome,
declaring the calamities of the Papists in Ireland</q>. It was in the
preceding year that Bishop Roderick had mortally offended the
agents of King Henry by his efforts to preserve from their grasp
the youthful Gerald, who, though yet in his boyhood, was chief
of the Geraldines, and destined, it was hoped, to become one day
the rallying point of a confederacy of the Irish chieftains. In
the month of May Gerald and his faithful escort passed without
<pb n='357'/><anchor id='Pg357'/>
molestation from the south to the north of Ireland, being hospitably
received in Thomond, Galway, and Sligo; and they were
safely entrenched within the barriers of Tyrconnell before the
government spies had even caught the intelligence of this journey.
On the 28th of June the Earl of Ormonde wrote a long
letter to the council of Ireland, giving information of the movements
of young Gerald. From this letter we learn that it was an
Irish rhymist that acted as his spy amongst the Northern chieftains,
and that, according to the latest intelligence received from
him, <q>twenty-four horsemen, well apparrelled</q>, had been appointed
to wait upon the young Geraldine. The King of Scotland, too,
solicited the Irish princes to commit Gerald to his care. However,
in another letter, of 20th July, the same earl writes that this scheme
was not pleasing to O'Neil and O'Donnell, but <q>the Bishop O'Donnell
(of Derry), James Delahoyde, Master Levrous, and Robert
Walshe, are gone as messengers to Scotland, to pray aid from the
Scottish king; and before their going, all the gentlemen of Ulster,
for the most part, promised to retain as many Scots as they should
bring with them, at their own expense and charges during the
time of their service in Ireland</q>&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>St. Pap.</hi>, iii. 52). Another
information further states that as a Christmas present in December,
1538, Art Oge O'Toole had sent to Gerald <q>a saffron shirt
trimmed with silk, and a mantle of English cloth fringed with
silk, together with a sum of money</q>&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, pag. 139). And a
few months later Cowley writes from Dublin to the English
court, that <q>there never was seen in Ireland so great a host of
Irishmen and Scots, both of the out isles and of the mainland of
Scotland; whilst at the same time the pretended Earl of Desmond
has all the strength of the west</q>&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, pag. 145). It is not
necessary to pursue the subsequent events of this confederacy, as
we have no express documents to attest the share taken in it by
the Bishop of Derry. One further fact alone connected with our
great prelate has been recorded by our annalists, and it, too,
regards the closing scene of his eventful life, viz., that before his
death he wished to become a member of the Franciscan order,
and dying on the 8th of October, 1550, <q>he was buried in the
monastery of Donegal in the habit of St. Francis</q>&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>Four Mast.</hi>,
v. 1517).
</p>

<p>
Eugene Magennis, the next bishop, governed the see from
1551 to 1568. It was during his episcopate that the venerable
church and monastery of St. Colomba, together with the town of
Derry, were reduced to a heap of ruins. The fact is thus narrated
by Cox: <q>Colonel Saintlow succeeded Randolph in the
command of the garrison, and lived as quietly as could be desired;
for the rebels were so daunted by the former defeat that they did
not dare to make any new attempt; but unluckily, on the 24th
<pb n='358'/><anchor id='Pg358'/>
day of April (1566), the ammunition took fire, and blew up both
the town and the fort of Derry, whereby twenty men were killed,
and all the victuals and provisions were destroyed, and no possibility
left of getting more, so that the soldiers were necessitated
to embark for Dublin</q>&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>Hist.</hi>, part i. pag. 322). This disaster
was regarded at the time as a divine chastisement for the profanation
of St. Columba's church and cell, the latter being used by
the heretical soldiery as a repository of ammunition, whilst the
former was defiled by their profane worship&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>O'Sulliv.</hi>, pag. 96).
</p>

<p>
The next bishop was Raymond O'Gallagher, who, when receiving
the administration of the see of Killala, in 1545, is
described in the Consistorial Acts as <q>clericus dioecesis Rapotensis
in vigesimotertio anno constitutus</q>. It was also commanded
that after four years, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> when he would have attained his twenty-seventh
year, he should be consecrated Bishop of Killala. In
1569, he was translated from that see to Derry, which he ruled
during the many perils and persecutions of Elizabeth's reign, till, as
Mooney writes, <q>omnium Episcoporurm Europae ordinatione
antiquissimus</q>, he died, full of years, on the 15th of March in
1601. In a government memorial of 28th July, 1592, Dr.
O'Gallagher is thus noticed: <q>First in Ulster is one Redmondus
O'Gallagher, Bishop of Derry.... The said Bishop
O'Gallagher hath been with divers governors of that land upon
protection, and yet he is supposed to enjoy the bishoprick
and all the aforesaid authorities these xxvi years and more,
whereby it is to be understood that he is not there as a
man without authority and secretly kept</q>&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>Kilken. Proceedings</hi>,
May, 1856, pag. 80). The xxvi of this passage has led
many into error as to the date of Dr. O'Gallagher's appointment
to Derry, which, reckoning back from 1592, should be placed
in 1567. However, that numeral probably is a misprint for
xxiii, such mistakes being very frequent in the mediaeval
manuscripts, as well as in more modern publications. The
following extract from the papers of Cardinal Morone in the
Vatican archives, will serve to show that in 1569 the see was
vacant by the death of Bishop Eugenius:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>Litterae Reverendissimi Armachani ad Patrem Polancum: Quod
Daniel ab ipso nominatus fiat Episcopus Darensis: contentio de
Episcopatu Clogherensi inter duos, videtur ponendus tertius:
Rapotensis et Darensis non iverunt ad concilium Provinciale propter
bella: Archiepiscopus Armacanus haberet suam Ecclesiam si vellet
consentire Reginae: posset mitti subsidium pro Armachano ad
Praesidentem Collegii Lovaniensis: Archiepiscopus Armachanus
male tractatur in carceribus</q>.
</quote>

<p>
This minute of Cardinal Morone bears no date, but is registered
with a series of papers of 1568 and 1569. The Father
<pb n='359'/><anchor id='Pg359'/>
Polanco to whom the Primate's letter was addressed, was the
Procurator-General of the Society of Jesus, and was the same
who was deputed to be bearer of the blessing of the Holy Father
to the dying founder of that great order. To the preceding
<foreign rend='italic'>minute</foreign> are added the following remarks, which seem to have
been presented to the Cardinal by Father Polanco:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Archiepiscopus Armachanus scribit expedire ut tertius nominetur
Episcopus pro Clogherensi Dioecesi, non tamen favet Domino
Milero. Causa posset committi in partibus D. Episcopo Accadensi
et aliquibus aliis comprovincialibus Episcopis.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Episcopatus Darensis in dicta Provincia Armachana vacat nunc
per obitum Eugenii ultimi Episcopi. Duo Hiberni dictae Dioecesis
pro eo obtinendo venerunt ad curiam: viz. Cornelius O'Chervallan
cum quibusdam litteris Patris David Wolff et cum aliis Rectoris
Lovanii. Item Magonius (Mac Mahon) Abbas commendatus litteris
Episcoporum Rapotensis et Kilmorensis cum approbatione capituli
Darensis</q>.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Dr. O'Gallagher, however, was the person chosen by the Holy
See, and was proclaimed in consistory before the close of 1569.
A few years later we find faculties communicated to him by
Rome for his own diocese, and for the whole province of
Armagh, <q>quamdiu venerabilis frater Richardus Archiepiscopus
Armachanus impeditus a Dioecesi et Provincia Armachana abfuerit</q>&mdash;(13
April, 1575, <hi rend='italic'>Ex. Secret. Brev.</hi>). About 1594
other special faculties were again communicated to him through
Cardinal Allan&mdash;(ap. <hi rend='italic'>King, Hist.</hi>, pag. 1213); and we soon after
meet with him in the camp of O'Donnell, when that chieftain
was gathering his forces to cut short the military career of
General Norris: <q>There were there</q>, writes O'Sullivan, <q>some
ecclesiastics, and especially Raymond O'Gallagher, Bishop of
Derry, and Vice-Primate of Ireland, who absolved from the
excommunication which they had incurred, those troops that
passed from the Elizabethan ranks to the Catholic army</q>&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>Hist.
Cath.</hi>, p. 181). It was in 1596 that Norris set out with about
10,000 men to invade North Connaught and Tyrconnell. That
general was flushed with his victories in France and Belgium,
nevertheless he was obliged to ignominiously retreat from the
Ulster frontiers, being unable even to bring to battle the chosen
army of 5,000 men which was led by the brave O'Donnel.
</p>

<p>
On the 22nd of July, 1597, an Irishman named Bernard
O'Donnell was arrested at Lisle, and brought before the royal
court, accused of carrying on treasonable intercourse with the
Spanish government, and of being bearer of despatches from the
Irish bishops and chieftains to the authorities in Spain and Rome.
From one of the questions proposed to him at his cross-examination,
<pb n='360'/><anchor id='Pg360'/>
we glean some further particulars connected with our
Bishop of Derry:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>Respondes tibi nulla fuisse negotia ab Hibernis commissa:
et tamen reperimus prae manibus tuis litteras cujusdam Gabrielis
Vasci (Vasquez), Theologi Societatis Jesu ex Hispania decimo die
mensis Junii superioris (1596) scriptis Romam ad Franciscum
Rodrigum (Rodriquez) Societatis Jesu, quibus te illi unice commendat
scribitque te eo profecturum fuisse negotiorum publicorum
causa. Simul etiam invenimus exemplum manu tua scriptum
epistolae cujusdam a Remundo Derensi Episcopo ad summum Pontificem,
ex qua apparet, te, post tuum ex Hispania ad Hibernos reditum,
nobiles Hibernos firmasse et illis animum addidisse ad arma
suscipienda contra Reginam Angliae: idemque rogat summum Pontificem,
ut tibi fidem adhibeat in multis quae illi dicenda tibi commisit.
Invenimus etiam prae manibus tuis exemplum litterarum manu tua
exaratum quibus O'Nellus ille summum Pontificem rogat ut tibi
fidem adhibeat non modo in his quae illi dicturus eras de beneficiorum
Ecclesiasticorum dispensatione apud Hibernos, sed etiam de
omnibus rebus publicis Hibernorum? <hi rend='italic'>Resp.</hi> Agnosco equidem illa
omnia exemplaria litterarum fuisse mea manu scripta: sed ad cumulandam
commendationem meam</q>.
</quote>

<p>
Fortunately, appended to this examination, the letter itself of
the Bishop of Derry has been preserved to us. We present it
in full to the reader, as it is the only letter of this great bishop
that the calamitous era of persecution has permitted to reach us:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Copie de lettre escrite au Pape par Remond Derensis Episcopus.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Tuam Sanctitatem latere non arbitramur quam alacri et excelso
animo nostrae nobilitatis praecipui, Sancti haud dubie Spiritus instinctu,
tyrannicae Anglorum pravitati ausi sunt resistere: omnem
ipsorum virulentiam et Satanici furoris artificia, aperto marte
viriliter irritando. Tametsi quis facile enumeret quae quotidie volvantur
et emergant quibus ut animum adderet, ipsosque in hoc
pulcherimo instituto spe subsidii confirmaret, stabiliretque, cum lator
praesentium N. (<hi rend='italic'>sic.</hi>) ex Hispania novissime venisset, cuncta ita uti
sunt Catholicae majestati fideliter relaturus, volumus atque monemus
ut Tua quoque Sanctitas fidem incunctanter eidem adhibeat; ac
luctuosae tuae Hiberniae et innumeris cladibus ab haereticis jamdiu
afflictae, squalidam ac funestam faciem benigno vultu aspiciat et
egregiam hanc occasionem divinitus, ut credimus, oblatam opportune
arripiat, memor quam eadem esse soleat occipiti calvo:
suisque fidelissimis non modo ab ineunte Christianismo clientibus,
sed ab aliquot annorum centuriis regio jure subditis, quam maturee
poterit clementer prospiciat, ac expectationis nostrae ac Tabellarii,
cui pleraque Tuae Sanctitati nuncianda relinquimus, desiderio satisfaciat:
cujus etiam nos, generis, industriae, nobilitatis, ac sinceri
et vehementis in religionem et patriam affectus, rationem habentes,
Tuam oramus Sanctitatem ut eundem benigno favore prosequatur,
ipsique de dignitate <hi rend='italic'>N.</hi> providere non cunctetur nostrum in hac
<pb n='361'/><anchor id='Pg361'/>
re judicium auctoritate sua comprobando</q>&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>St. Pap.</hi>, Public Rec.
Off. London).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
With this evidence before him, the reader may fully appreciate
the favourite modern theory of the defenders of the Protestant
Establishment, that, forsooth, the Irish bishops during Elizabeth's
reign abandoned the faith of their fathers, and became liege servants
of the church by law established! Dr. Cotton when speaking
of our see makes a somewhat more reserved, but equally
erroneous statement: <q>Redmond O'Gallagher</q>, he says, <q>was
bishop at this time, but whether recognised as such by Queen
Elizabeth and the Protestant Church <emph>does not appear</emph></q>&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>,
iii. 315). Why, it does appear as plainly as the noon-day sun
that he was the determined enemy of the Protestant queen and
her establishment: throughout his whole episcopate he was a
devoted pastor of the Catholic Church, and thus his fidelity and
devotion to the cause of God merited for him in death the
martyr's crown. First on the list of those who suffered for the
faith during the reign of Elizabeth is reckoned by Dr. Mathews,
Archbishop of Dublin, in 1623, <q>Redmondus Galluthurius Darensis
Episcopus et Martyr</q>&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>Relat. ad. S. C. de Prop. Fid.</hi>)
Mooney, writing in 1617, also styles him a martyr: <q>Episcopus
Redmondus Gallaher martyr obiit anno 1601</q>; and O'Sullivan
Beare, about the same time, adds some of the circumstances of his
death: <q>Raymundus O'Gallacher</q>, he writes, <q>Derii vel Luci
Episcopus, ab Anglis bipennibus confessus, et capite truncatus
annum circiter octogesimum agens</q>&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>Hist. Cath.</hi>, pag. 77). The
Four Masters (ad an. 1601) also mention his being put to death
by the English; and Rothe reckons him amongst those who suffered
for the faith. Tradition still points out the spot on which
the venerable bishop was slain, almost midway on the high road
between O'Kane's Castle and Dungiven. (See Dr. Kelly's <hi rend='italic'>Essays</hi>,
with the additions of Dr. M'Carthy: Dublin, 1864, pag. 425).
</p>

<p>
It now only remains to notice some few popular errors connected
with this see.
</p>

<p>
1. On account of the old Latin form of the name of this see,
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Darensis</hi>, it has frequently been confounded with the Diocese
of Kildare. Thus, not to mention more recent examples, Ware
severely criticises Bale of Ossory for falling into this mistake&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>Bishops</hi>,
pag. 190). The chief criterion for distinguishing between
the two sees, is the mention which is generally made of
the metropolitan to whom the brief is addressed, or of the ecclesiastical
province to which the diocese belongs.
</p>

<p>
2. Dr. King notices as an improbability that O'Gallagher
could have been bishop for fifty-two years, and, nevertheless, be
only (as Dr. King imagines) seventy years of age at his death.
However, true dates are sure always to mutually correspond.
<pb n='362'/><anchor id='Pg362'/>
Referring to the Consistorial Acts, cited above, it appears that
in 1545 Dr. O'Gallagher was in his twenty-third year, and that
a dispensation was then granted to him to be consecrated bishop
in his twenty-seventh year: hence, at his death in 1601, Dr.
O'Gallagher may very well have attained the fifty-second year
of his Episcopate, whilst he will be found, not indeed in his
seventieth year, but, as O'Sullivan writes, <q>circa octogesimum
annum agens</q>.
</p>

<p>
3. The succession of bishops in the See of Derry affords a
practical refutation of the novel theory so fashionable now-a-days
amongst the clergy of the Establishment, that forsooth the
native clergy without hesitation embraced the tenets of Henry
VIII. and Elizabeth, and that the Catholic Church was only
upheld in our island <q>by begging friars and foreign priests</q>.
We pray the reader whenever he hears such a statement made,
to call to mind the See of Derry. Was Roderick, <q>the arrant
traitor</q>, in the days of King Henry, a <emph>foreign priest</emph> and a
stranger to our island? Was Raymond O'Gallagher a foreigner
during Elizabeth's reign? Oh! ask the faithful of Innishowen,
amongst whom he first exercised his sacred ministry&mdash;ask the
camps of Maguire, O'Donnell, and O'Neill! Ask, too, the very
enemies of our holy faith, the first founders of the Protestant
Establishment: their deeds will tell you that he was the true
pastor of the fold, and hence they set a price upon his head, and
at length conferred on him the martyr's crown.
</p>

<p>
There was, however, one foreign prelate who received an appointment
in Derry at this period, and he was precisely <emph>the first</emph>
and <emph>only</emph> Protestant nominee to this see during Elizabeth's
reign. <q>To the two northern sees of Raphoe and Derry</q>, writes
Dr. Mant, <q>Elizabeth made no collation, unless in the year 1595,
when her reign was drawing towards its close</q>&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>Hist.</hi>, i. 284).
George Montgomery, a Scotchman, was the individual thus
chosen to be the first representative of the <emph>Establishment</emph> in
our northern sees. His patent for the sees of Clogher, Derry,
and Raphoe, was dated the 13th of June, 1595, where already
for many years a canonically appointed bishop ruled
the fold of Christ. The good sense, however, of the
Knoxian reformer judged it more prudent not to risk himself
and family amidst the O'Kanes whilst arms were in the
hands of the Irish chieftains: he hence consigned to oblivion his
royal patent, and allowed the Irish pastors to feed in peace their
spiritual fold. Even when, in 1605, he sought for a new appointment
to these sees at the hands of King James, as we learn from
Mant, Ware, and other Protestant authorities, he took care to
make no allusion to the writ which he had formerly received in
the thirty-seventh year of Elizabeth.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='363'/><anchor id='Pg363'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Dr. Colenso And The Old Testament. No. II.</head>

<p>
The Colenso controversy has entered on a new phase. It appears
we must no longer speak of Dr. Colenso as the Protestant
Bishop of Natal. He enjoyed this title indeed for a time, in
virtue of letters patent issued by the supreme head of the Established
Church. But the judicial committee of her Majesty's
privy council has sat in judgment on her Majesty's letters patent,
and has just pronounced that they are invalid and without effect
in law; that her Majesty had assumed a prerogative which did
not belong to her, and had been guilty in fact, though inadvertently,
of an illegal aggression upon the rights of her colonists.
</p>

<p>
The history of this remarkable decision may be told in a few
words. Dr Colenso was appointed to the See of Natal in the
year 1853. In the same year, Dr. Gray, as Bishop of Cape
Town, was invested by royal letters patent with metropolitan
jurisdiction over Dr. Colenso and the diocese of Natal. Ten
years passed away, and each in his own sphere exercised the
authority which he was supposed to have received from the
crown. At length Dr. Colenso's book appears, and a charge of
heresy is preferred against him. The charge is entertained by
the supposed metropolitan, who sets up a court, proceeds to try
the cause, and finally, in December, 1863, delivers his sentence.
By this sentence Dr. Colenso is deprived of his see, and forbidden
to exercise his sacred functions within the ecclesiastical province
of Cape Town. The deposed bishop refuses to acknowledge the
jurisdiction of the court, and appeals to the privy council. The
controversy was thus reduced to a simple question of law,&mdash;was
Dr. Gray legally possessed of those metropolitan rights to which
he laid claim? To this question the judicial committee of the
privy council has given a clear and decisive answer. When a
colony is once endowed with legislative institutions of its own,
the crown no longer possesses any authority to create sees or to
confer ecclesiastical jurisdiction. Now in the two colonies of
Cape Town and Natal an independent legislature had been established
in the year 1850; and therefore the letters patent of
1853 were null and void in law. Hence it follows that, according
to English law, Dr. Gray was never in point of fact the
Metropolitan of Cape Town; but neither was Dr. Colenso the
Bishop of Natal.
</p>

<p>
Thus has Dr. Colenso pulled down the whole edifice of the
English colonial episcopate. Like Sampson of old, he has been,
indeed, avenged upon his enemies, but he has been himself
crushed beneath the ruins he has made. Yet, though his jurisdiction
<pb n='364'/><anchor id='Pg364'/>
as a bishop may be taken away, his moral power and his
influence are increased. He now appears not only as an eminent
leader of the free-thinking and infidel school of theology, but as
a martyr who has suffered in the cause; and this new character
gives him an additional claim to the sympathy and veneration
of his followers. When the youthful plant is checked in
its upward growth by the skilful knife of the gardener, it puts
forth new branches on every side, and flourishes with increased
luxuriance. And so, according to every human probability, the
check which Dr. Colenso has received will but promote the
rapid expansion of his views, and their dissemination throughout
the Protestant Church. It is therefore all the more important
for those who defend the cause of truth to refute his charges
against the Bible, and to lay bare the sophistry of his arguments.
Let us take the following example:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q><hi rend='italic'>And Jehovah spake unto Moses, saying, ... Gather
thou the congregation together unto the door of the tabernacle of
the congregation. And Moses did as Jehovah commanded him.
And the assembly was gathered unto the door of the tabernacle of
the congregation</hi></q>&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>Lev.</hi>, viii. 1-4).</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>First, it appears to be certain that by the expressions used so
often, here and elsewhere, <q>the assembly</q>, <q>the whole assembly</q>,
<q>all the congregation</q>, is meant the whole body of the people&mdash;at
all events, the <emph>adult males in the prime of life</emph> among them&mdash;and
not merely the <emph>elders</emph> or <emph>heads of the people</emph>, as some have
supposed, in order to escape from such difficulties as that which
we are now about to consider. At any rate, I cannot, with due
regard to the truth, allow myself to believe, or attempt to persuade
others to believe, that such expressions as the above can
possibly be meant to be understood of the elders only....</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>This vast body of people, then, received on this occasion,
and on other similar occasions, as we are told, an express command
from Jehovah himself, to assemble <q>at the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation</q>. We need not press the word
<q>all</q> so as to include every individual man of this number.
Still the expression <q>all the congregation</q>, the <q>whole assembly</q>,
must be surely understood to imply the <emph>main body</emph> of those who
were able to attend, especially when summoned thus solemnly by
the direct voice of Jehovah himself. The <emph>mass</emph> of these 603,550
men <emph>ought</emph>, we must believe, to have obeyed such a command,
and hastened to present themselves at the <q>door of the tabernacle
of the congregation</q>....</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Now the whole width of the <emph>tabernacle</emph> was 10 cubits, or
18 feet, ... and its length was 30 cubits, or 54 feet, as
may be gathered from <hi rend='italic'>Exodus</hi>, xxvi. Allowing two feet in
width for each full-grown man, nine men could just have
<pb n='365'/><anchor id='Pg365'/>
stood in front of it. Supposing, then, that <q>all the congregation</q>
of adult males in the prime of life had given due heed to
the divine summons, and had hastened to take their stand, side
by side, as closely as possible, in front, not merely of the <emph>door</emph>, but
of the whole <emph>end</emph> of the tabernacle in which the door was, they
would have reached, allowing 18 inches between each rank of
nine men, for a distance of more than 100,000 feet, in fact nearly
<emph>twenty miles</emph></q>&mdash;(Part i. pp. 31,33).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Dr. Colenso revels in figures. When he sets about a problem
he delights to look at it from every point of view, and to work
out his sum in a variety of ways. By a very simple process of
multiplication and addition he has here proved that the Scripture
narrative is quite ridiculous and absurd. Yet he is not content.
He must lead his readers to the same conclusion by another
process:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>As the text says distinctly <q>at the door of the tabernacle</q>,
they must have come <emph>within the court</emph>. And this, indeed, was
necessary for the purpose for which they were summoned on
this occasion, namely, to witness the ceremony of the consecration
of Aaron and his sons to the priestly office. This was to be performed
inside the tabernacle itself, and could only, therefore, be
seen by those standing at the door....</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But how many would the <emph>whole court</emph> have contained? Its
area (60 yards by 30 yards) was 1,800 square yards, and the
area of the tabernacle itself (18 yards by 6 yards) was 108 square
yards. Hence the area of the court outside the tabernacle was
1,692 square yards. But the whole congregation would have
made a body of people nearly twenty miles&mdash;or, more accurately,
33,530 yards&mdash;long, and 18 feet or 6 yards wide; that is to say,
packed closely together, they would have covered an area of
201,180 square yards. In fact the court, when thronged, could
only have held five thousand people; whereas the able-bodied
men alone exceeded six hundred thousand.... It is inconceivable
how, under such circumstances, <q>all the assembly</q>, the
<q>whole congregation</q>, could have been summoned to attend <q>at
the door of the tabernacle</q>, by the express command of Almighty
God</q>&mdash;(pp. 33, 34).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Before we proceed to examine this singular objection, put forward
in so plausible and popular a form, it may be useful to describe,
in a few words, the general appearance of the tabernacle,
and of the court which surrounded it. Our readers will thus be
placed in a position to form a clear and distinct idea of the difficulty
which Dr. Colenso has raised. And we are satisfied that
the more thoroughly it is understood, the more complete and
satisfactory will the explanation be found.
</p>

<p>
The court of the tabernacle was an oblong rectangle, one hundred
<pb n='366'/><anchor id='Pg366'/>
cubits<note place='foot'>The cubit was originally the length of the human arm from the elbow to
the end of the middle finger. It is variously estimated at from 16 to 22 inches.
Our readers may form an idea of the tabernacle and the court, sufficiently accurate
for all practical purposes, by allowing one yard English for every two cubits.
See Smith's <hi rend='italic'>Dictionary of the Bible</hi>, or his <hi rend='italic'>Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities</hi>.</note> in length, from east to west, and fifty cubits in
breadth, from north to south. This space was enclosed by hangings
of fine twisted linen, supported by sixty pillars, to which
they were attached by hooks and fillets of silver. The entrance
to the court was at the eastern end; it was twenty cubits in
width; and across the opening was suspended a curtain, embroidered
with fancy needlework, and rich with gorgeous colours.
</p>

<p>
Within the court, and towards the western end, was erected
the tabernacle. It was simply a large tent, constructed with
elaborate care, and formed of costly materials. Like the court
in which it was placed, it was an oblong rectangle, being thirty
cubits in length and ten cubits in breadth. The walls were of
setim or acacia wood; the roof of fine linen, covered with curtains
of goats' hair and skins. The eastern end was open, but
was furnished with a rich hanging to serve as a door. Internally
the tabernacle was divided by a veil into two apartments;&mdash;the
<hi rend='italic'>Holy Place</hi>, twenty cubits in length, which contained the golden
candlestick, the table of show-bread, and the altar of incense;
and the <hi rend='italic'>Holy of Holies</hi>, ten cubits in length, in which was placed
the ark of the covenant. The <hi rend='italic'>Holy Place</hi> was appropriated to the
priests, who entered it twice a day, morning and evening. The
<hi rend='italic'>Holy of Holies</hi> was forbidden to all but the high priest alone,
and even he could enter only once a year, on the great day of
atonement.
</p>

<p>
The argument of Dr. Colenso is now easily understood. According
to the Scripture narrative, the whole multitude of the
Israelites, or at least six hundred thousand men, were summoned
to attend, and actually did attend, <q>at the door of the tabernacle</q>.
It follows that they must have stood in a line eighteen feet broad
and twenty miles long, which is perfectly absurd. Besides, they
could not have witnessed the ceremony to which they were summoned
unless they came within the court. But this is an absolute
impossibility, as the court would only hold five thousand
men, even if they were closely packed together.
</p>

<p>
Here is, indeed, a very serious charge against the credibility
of the Pentateuch. But it seems to us a charge which, from its
very nature, must refute itself. Dr. Colenso will not deny that
the Book of <hi rend='italic'>Leviticus</hi> was written while the tabernacle was still
in existence; and that its author, whoever he may have been, had
the tabernacle and its appurtenances constantly before his eyes.
If he was not a truthful historian, but an impostor, he was certainly
<pb n='367'/><anchor id='Pg367'/>
a most skilful impostor. He must have known well, all
his readers must have known well&mdash;quite as well as Dr. Colenso&mdash;that
the tabernacle could not hold more than five thousand people.
Now it is perfectly incredible that any man of common
sense, not to say a most clever and successful impostor, under
these circumstances, would have ventured boldly to state that six
hundred thousand persons were gathered within its precincts.
</p>

<p>
Let us, however, examine the argument in detail. The foundation
on which it rests is clearly enough stated by Dr. Colenso.
<q>It appears to be certain that by the expressions, used so often
here and elsewhere, <q>the assembly</q>, <q>the whole assembly</q>, <q>all
the congregation</q>, is meant the whole body of the people&mdash;at all
events, the <emph>adult males in the prime of life</emph> among them&mdash;and
not merely the <emph>elders</emph> or <emph>heads of the people</emph></q>, etc. We deny
this assertion. The Hebrew word עדה (heda), which is here
translated the <emph>assembly</emph>, the <emph>congregation</emph>, comes from the root
יעד (yahad), <emph>to appoint</emph>, and means literally an <emph>assembly
meeting by appointment</emph>. It is quite true, as Dr. Colenso contends,
that the word is sometimes employed to designate the
entire body of the people. But it is also true, though he ignores
the fact, that it is sometimes applied to a <emph>select few</emph>, invested with
a certain authority and jurisdiction. We shall be content with
submitting to our readers one remarkable example.
</p>

<p>
In the thirty-fifth chapter of <hi rend='italic'>Numbers</hi> we read of the cities of
refuge. They were to be six in number&mdash;three upon each side
of the Jordan; and were intended to afford shelter to those who
had unintentionally shed innocent blood. <q>And they shall be
for you cities for refuge from the avenger; that the manslayer
die not until he stand before the <emph>assembly</emph> (עדה) for <emph>judgment</emph></q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Numbers</hi>, xxxv. 12).<note place='foot'>Our readers must not be surprised if in this and in other instances we
depart a little from the reading of the Vulgate version, and adhere to the
literal translation of the Hebrew text. In controversy it is often desirable to
accommodate ourselves to the views and even to the prejudices of our adversaries;
and since the authority of the Hebrew text is admitted by all classes of
Christians, we appeal to it as a common ground of argument. Besides, when the
point in dispute depends on the meaning of a Hebrew phrase, it will be always
useful to have the <emph>exact words</emph> of the Hebrew text before our eyes.</note> It is then laid down that if the murder
have been deliberate, it shall be punished with death (16-21).
But if the fatal blow have been struck <emph>without enmity</emph> or <emph>premeditation</emph>,
or <emph>by chance</emph> (22, 23), <q>then the <emph>assembly</emph> (עדה)
shall <emph>judge</emph> between the slayer and the revenger of blood....
And the <emph>assembly</emph> (עדה) shall deliver the slayer out of
the hand of the revenger of blood, and the <emph>assembly</emph> (עדה)
shall restore him to the city of his refuge</q> (24, 25). It is quite
impossible to suppose that the judicial tribunal here spoken of
could be the entire body of the people, or even the 600,000
<pb n='368'/><anchor id='Pg368'/>
male adults. The question to be tried was one of the highest
moment, involving the life or death of a fellow-citizen. It was
also one of extreme delicacy, having to deal, not with the mere
external act, but with the motives and feelings of the heart.
To the <emph>assembly</emph> (עדה) it belonged to pronounce, not merely
whether one man had killed another, but whether in his heart
he had <emph>committed the crime</emph> of murder. For this purpose witnesses
should be examined, evidence should be carefully sifted,
and, perhaps, even the domestic secrets of the accused and of his
victim should be laid bare. Was this a task that could be
entrusted to a mixed multitude of 600,000 men?
</p>

<p>
Accordingly we find that Rosenmuller, in his commentary
on this passage (<hi rend='italic'>Num.</hi>, xxxv. 24), explains the word, <emph>the
assembly of judges</emph>&mdash;<q>cætus judicum urbis in cujus agro contigerit
homicidium</q>. If we apply this interpretation to the
passage in <hi rend='italic'>Leviticus</hi>, every shadow of improbability and inconsistency
will at once disappear from the narrative. Now, we
ask Dr. Colenso, when a word in Scriptural usage has two
different meanings, which must we choose when we come to
examine a text in which that word is found? Are we to select
the meaning which is in every way suitable to the context and
circumstances; or must we rather adopt an interpretation which
will make the sense absurd and impossible? Dr. Colenso has
preferred the latter course. It appears to us that the former is
alone consistent with the instinct of common sense and the
principles of genuine criticism.
</p>

<p>
We think our readers will admit that we have fairly established
our point, and proved that Dr. Colenso's argument is utterly
destitute of foundation. For the ordinary purposes of controversy
it would be unnecessary to go further. But we frankly
confess we aim at something more. We are not content with
answering the argument of Dr. Colenso; we wish to shake his
authority as a trustworthy critic. All that he has written against
the Pentateuch is made up of these two elements&mdash;first, the
<emph>meaning</emph> which he attaches to the narrative, and, secondly, the
<emph>process of reasoning</emph> by which he labours to show that this meaning
is inconsistent or impossible. Now it is plain, from the
argument we are considering, that Dr. Colenso is liable to the
grossest errors, not only when he undertakes to interpret the
sacred text, but also when he proceeds to reason on his own
interpretation. If this assertion be established, his authority can
have but little weight.
</p>

<p>
Let us suppose then, for a moment, that by the <emph>assembly</emph> is
meant, in a general way, the entire people of Israel; does it
follow, as Dr. Colenso maintains, that, according to the narrative,
600,000 men must have <q>hastened to present themselves at the
<pb n='369'/><anchor id='Pg369'/>
<q>door of the tabernacle?</q></q> We believe it does not. Nay,
more, we believe that the absurdity of Dr. Colenso's opinion is
clearly proved by some of the texts which he has himself adduced.
For instance:&mdash;<q>Bring forth the blasphemer out of the
camp ... and let <emph>all the assembly</emph> (עדה) stone him</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Lev.</hi>, xxiv. 14). And again, in the case of the Sabbath-breaker:&mdash;<q>The
man shall be surely put to death; <emph>all the
assembly</emph> (עדה) shall stone him with stones without the camp.
And <emph>all the assembly</emph> (עדה) brought him without the camp,
and stoned him with stones, and he died</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Num.</hi>, xv. 35, 36).
No one will maintain that the writer here means to say that
600,000 men were engaged in carrying the condemned man, or
that 600,000 men threw stones at him. If Dr. Colenso had paused
for a moment to reflect on these texts as he copied them from
the Bible, we are convinced he would have suppressed his foolish
argument. Exactly as it is said that <emph>all the assembly</emph> was
gathered into the door of the tabernacle, so too is it said that <emph>all
the assembly</emph> stoned the blasphemer and the Sabbath-breaker.
In the latter case, it is clear that the number of those who were
actually engaged in carrying out the sentence of God was comparatively
small, but the act is fairly ascribed to the whole community,
because <emph>all</emph> were <emph>summoned</emph> to take part in it, and those
who complied with the summons <emph>represented</emph> those who did not.
Surely there is no reason why we may not apply the same interpretation
to the former passage.
</p>

<p>
Nor is this mode of speaking peculiar to Sacred Scripture.
Every year the members of the House of Commons are summoned
to appear at the bar of the House of Lords; every year
we are told that they obey that summons. Who is there that questions
the truth of this statement? It represents a fact with which
we are all familiar. Yet Dr. Colenso with his rule and measure
will demonstrate that the fact is impossible and the statement
false, because the place in which the Commons are said to assemble
cannot possibly hold one-tenth of their number.
</p>

<p>
So much for Dr. Colenso as an interpreter of the Bible. He
is satisfied that if we accept the narrative we must believe that
six hundred thousand men were gathered unto the door of the
tabernacle. We have seen that he is mistaken; but let us now
concede this fact, and let us see how he proceeds to reason upon it.
Since the tabernacle was only eighteen feet wide, this immense
multitude must have stood in a line eighteen feet in breadth and
twenty miles in length. This is certainly a most extraordinary
conclusion. No multitude ever yet stood in such a line; no multitude
<emph>could</emph> stand in such a line unless they had been specially
trained during many years for that purpose. There is no conceivable
reason why the Jews on this occasion should have stood
<pb n='370'/><anchor id='Pg370'/>
in such a line. And yet Dr. Colenso will have it that they <emph>must</emph>
have stood in this way, if it be true that they were gathered unto
the door of the tabernacle.
</p>

<p>
We are tempted to offer an illustration of the very peculiar
manner in which Dr. Colenso here pursues his critical examination
of the Bible. Many of our readers will remember the 15th
of August, 1843. In the phraseology of Scripture it might be
said that upon that day 100,000 Irishmen were <emph>gathered to
O'Connell</emph> on the Hill of Tara.<note place='foot'>This mode of expression is perfectly conformable to scriptural usage; for
we read (<hi rend='italic'>Numbers</hi>, x. 3) that <emph>all the assembly</emph> (עדה) were directed to assemble
themselves <emph>to Moses</emph>: and again, (III. <hi rend='italic'>Kings</hi>, viii. 2) it is said that <q>all the men
of Israel assembled themselves <emph>unto King Solomon</emph></q>.</note> To the ordinary reader such a
statement would present no insuperable difficulty. It would
convey, indeed, a pretty correct idea of what we all know
actually to have taken place. But when submitted to the
Colenso process, this simple narrative will be found to undergo
a very startling transformation. O'Connell did not occupy a
space more than two feet broad. Therefore there was just room
for one full-grown man to stand in front of him. The second
must have stood behind the first; the third behind the second;
and so the whole multitude must have extended in a single
unbroken line over many miles of country. A little boy at
school could tell us that, when we say the multitude was
gathered unto O'Connell, we do not mean that the multitude
occupied a space which was only as broad as O'Connell. Yet
Dr. Colenso maintains that this is the only meaning which the
phrase admits. Such principles would make strange havoc with
history.
</p>

<p>
Again, Dr. Colenso contends that all who were <emph>gathered unto
the door of the tabernacle</emph> <q>must have come <emph>within the court</emph></q>.
<q>This, indeed</q>, he says, <q>was necessary for the purpose for which
they were summoned on this occasion, namely, to witness the
ceremony of the consecration of Aaron and his sons to the
priestly office</q>. Now it is nowhere stated that this was, in point
of fact, the purpose for which the people were gathered together.
Certainly, if it were <emph>impossible</emph> they could witness the ceremony, as
Dr. Colenso assures us, we are bound to infer that it was <emph>not</emph> for
this purpose they were assembled. Nor is it difficult to find
another, and quite a sufficient reason, for gathering the people
together on this solemn occasion. It may have been the design
of God that, by their <emph>presence</emph> in and around the court of the
tabernacle, they should make a public profession of their faith,
and formally acknowledge the priesthood of Aaron. Thus, in
the illustration already introduced, it was impossible for 100,000
people to hear O'Connell speak; but their presence was itself a
<pb n='371'/><anchor id='Pg371'/>
public declaration that they adhered to his principles and accepted
him for their leader.
</p>

<p>
Was it, however, really impossible that those without the court
should witness the leading features of the ceremony? Certainly
not. We must bear in mind that the court was not enclosed by
stone walls, but by hangings of fine linen. Nothing, therefore,
could have been more simple than to loop up these curtains to the
pillars by which they were supported, and thus to afford a full view
of the tabernacle to those who stood without. Dr. Colenso will
probably say that in the scripture narrative there is no mention
of any such arrangement. Neither, we reply, is it said that those
without the court were intended to witness the ceremony. But
if we suppose that this was intended, we must also suppose that
the means were adopted which would make it <emph>possible</emph>.
</p>

<p>
There is yet another error of Dr. Colenso which we cannot
pass by in silence. It is true, the blunder to which we refer has
little to do with his argument. But it has much to do with the
question whether he is a competent authority on the sacred
text, even when he speaks with special emphasis and with unhesitating
confidence. <q>Supposing that <q>all the congregation</q> of adult
males ... had hastened to take their stand ... in front,
not merely of the <emph>door</emph>, but of the whole <emph>end</emph> of the tabernacle in
which the door was</q>, etc. It is clear that the writer of this
passage was under the impression (which, indeed, he conveys not
only by his words, but still more by his italics&mdash;for they <emph>are</emph> his)
that <emph>the whole end</emph> of the tabernacle was wider than the <emph>door</emph>.
Now if he had taken the pains to read even an English translation
of the sacred book which he so rashly presumed to condemn,
he never could have fallen into so great a mistake. He would
have seen that the <emph>whole eastern end</emph> of the tabernacle was left
open, and that the open space was covered only by a curtain
which extended across from side to side. Consequently, if mention
were really made of a door, it must have been this curtain
itself that was called by that name.
</p>

<p>
But if Dr. Colenso had gone a little further, and had consulted
any Hebrew lexicon, he would have discovered that the sacred
writer does not speak of a <emph>door</emph>, but rather of a <emph>doorway</emph>. The
tabernacle had in fact no <emph>door</emph> properly so called. The word
פתח (<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>pethach</foreign>), which is used by the sacred writers when
speaking of the tabernacle, signifies, as Gesenius explains it, <emph>an
opening</emph>, <emph>an entrance</emph>. It means, therefore, the whole end of the
tabernacle, which was left <emph>open</emph> to the court when the curtain was
drawn. In Hebrew the idea of <emph>a door</emph> is expressed by דלת
(<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>deleth</foreign>). When treating of this word, Gesenius, having first
explained its meaning, pointedly remarks: <q>It differs from פתח,
which denotes the doorway which the door closes</q>. It is quite
<pb n='372'/><anchor id='Pg372'/>
certain, therefore, that the <emph>door</emph> and the <emph>whole end of the tabernacle</emph>,
which Dr. Colenso so emphatically contrasts, were in reality one
and the same thing.
</p>

<p>
It is time, however, that we pass to another of Dr. Colenso's
arguments:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q><hi rend='italic'>And the skin of the bullock, and all his flesh, with his head,
and with his legs, and his inwards, and his dung, even the whole
bullock, shall he (the Priest) carry forth without the camp, unto a
clean place, where the ashes are poured out, and burn him on the
wood with fire. Where the ashes are poured out there shall he be
burned</hi></q>&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>Lev.</hi>, iv. 11, 12).</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>We have seen that the whole population of Israel at the
exodus may be reckoned at two millions. Now we cannot well
allow for a <emph>living</emph> man, with room for his cooking, sleeping, and
other necessaries and conveniences of life, less than three times
the space required for a <emph>dead</emph> one in his grave.... Let us
allow, however, for each person on the average three times 6 feet
by 2 feet, the size of a coffin for a full-grown man,&mdash;that is, let
us allow for each person 36 square feet or 4 square yards. Then
it follows that ... the camp must have covered, the people
being crowded as thickly as possible, an area of 8,000,000 square
yards, or more than 1652 acres of ground.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Upon this very moderate estimate, then (which in truth is
far within the mark), we must imagine a vast encampment of
this extent, swarming with people, more than <emph>a mile and a half
across</emph> in each direction, with the tabernacle in the centre....
Thus the refuse of these sacrifices would have had to be carried
by the priest himself (Aaron, Eleazar, or Ithamar,&mdash;there were
no others) a distance of three-quarters of a mile....</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But how huge does this difficulty become, if, instead of taking
the excessively cramped area of 1652 acres, less than <emph>three square
miles</emph>, for such a camp as this, we take the more reasonable
allowance of Scott, who says, <q>this encampment is computed
to have formed a moveable city of <emph>twelve miles square</emph>, that is,
about the size of London itself,</q>&mdash;as it well might be, considering
that the population was as large as that of London, and that in
the Hebrew tents there were no first, second, third, and fourth
stories, no crowded garrets and underground cellars. In that
case the offal of these sacrifices would have had to be carried by
Aaron himself, or one of his sons, a distance of six miles....
In fact, we have to imagine the priest having himself to carry, on
his back, on foot, from St. Paul's to the outskirts of the metropolis,
the <q>skin, and flesh, and head, and legs, and inwards, and dung,
even the whole bullock</q>.... This supposition involves, of
course, an absurdity. But it is our duty to look plain facts in the
face</q>&mdash;(Part i. pp. 38-40).
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='373'/><anchor id='Pg373'/>

<p>
We agree with Dr. Colenso that this is a <q>huge difficulty</q>,
and that the duties of the priest, as described by him, involve a
manifest absurdity. But we contend that the duties of the priest,
as described by him, are not to be found in the Pentateuch; that
<emph>all the circumstances</emph> which constitute the difficulty and the
absurdity are simply <emph>additions of his own</emph>. This is indeed a
serious charge against a writer who represents himself to the
public as an earnest and conscientious searcher after truth. But
we hope to satisfy our readers that it is a plain and obvious fact;
and it is our duty, as Dr. Colenso truly tells us, <q>to look plain
facts in the face</q>.
</p>

<p>
It is evident that the whole weight of the objection consists
in this: that, according to the sacred narrative, the priest is commanded,
first, to carry the bullock <emph>himself</emph>; secondly, to carry it
<emph>on his back</emph>; thirdly, in doing so, to <emph>go on foot</emph>. Now there is
not the faintest insinuation in any text Dr. Colenso has produced,
nor, we may add, in any text the Pentateuch contains, that the
priest should <emph>go on foot</emph>, or that he should carry the bullock <emph>on
his back</emph>. These two ideas are to be found only in the fanciful
and rather irreverent gloss of Dr. Colenso.
</p>

<p>
Neither is it commanded in the sacred text that the priest
should <emph>himself</emph> carry the bullock out of the camp. Even in the
English translation there is nothing to imply that he might not,
for this duty, employ the service of his attendant Levites. It is
said, indeed, <q>he shall carry forth the bullock without the camp</q>.
But by the common use of language we may impute to a person,
as his own, the act which he does by the agency of another.
Thus a minister of state is said to write a letter, when the letter
is written at his direction by his secretary. In the Fourth
Book of <hi rend='italic'>Kings</hi> it is recorded of Nabuchodonosor that <q><emph>he carried
away all Jerusalem</emph>, and all the princes, and all the valiant men
of the army, to the number of ten thousand, into captivity:...
and the judges of the land he carried into captivity from Jerusalem
into Babylon. And all the strong men, seven thousand,
and the artificers and the smiths a thousand</q>, etc.&mdash;(IV. <hi rend='italic'>Kings</hi>,
xxiv. 14-16). No one dreams of any difficulty in a sentence
like this. Yet, if we admit the Colenso system of interpretation,
the difficulty is insuperable, because the <emph>meaning of the sentence</emph>
is, that Nabuchodonosor <emph>himself</emph> carried that immense multitude
<emph>on his back</emph> from Jerusalem to Babylon.
</p>

<p>
If we now turn to the Hebrew text we shall find that it is still
less favourable to Dr. Colenso and his <q>huge difficulty</q>. The
word והוציא (vehotzi), which is there used, literally means <emph>and
he shall cause [it] to go forth</emph>, that is to say, <emph>he shall have it removed</emph>.
This will be at once admitted by every biblical scholar,
and can be made intelligible without much difficulty to the
<pb n='374'/><anchor id='Pg374'/>
general reader. In the Hebrew language there are several forms
of the same verb, sometimes called conjugations, each of which
has a meaning peculiar to itself. The primitive form is <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>kal</foreign>; and
the <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>hiphil</foreign> form <q>denotes the <emph>causing</emph> or <emph>permitting</emph> of the action,
signified by the primitive <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>kal</foreign></q>.<note place='foot'>Nordheim's <hi rend='italic'>Hebrew Grammar</hi>, § 148; see also Gesenius, § 53, <q><hi rend='italic'>Significations
of Hiphil</hi>. It is properly <emph>causative of kal</emph>.</q></note> For example: קדש (kadash) in
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>kal</foreign> signifies <emph>to be holy</emph>; in <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>hiphil</foreign>, <emph>to cause to be holy</emph>, <emph>to sanctify</emph>;
נטה (natah) in <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>kal</foreign> means <emph>to bow</emph>; in <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>hiphil</foreign>, <emph>to cause to bow</emph>, <emph>to
bend</emph>. Now, in the passage quoted by Dr. Colenso the word
והוציא is the <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>hiphil</foreign> form of יצא (yatza), <emph>to go forth</emph>; it therefore
means literally <emph>to cause to go forth</emph>.<note place='foot'>Accordingly, this is the first meaning given for the word by Gesenius in his
Lexicon. In this sense, too, it is frequently employed in the Mosaic narrative.
Here are two examples, taken almost at random, in which we find the same word
in the same conjugation, mood, and tense: When Joseph, in prison, asked the
chief butler of Pharaoh to intercede for him with his royal master, he added:
<q>And thou shalt <emph>bring me</emph> (והוצאתני&mdash;vehotzethani) out of this prison</q>&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>Gen.</hi>
xl. 14). Will Dr. Colenso say that Joseph intended the chief butler should
<emph>carry him</emph> out of prison <emph>on his back</emph>? Again, when the Jews murmured against
Moses and Aaron in the desert, they cry out, <q>Ye have <emph>brought us forth</emph> (הוצאתם&mdash;hotzethem)
into this wilderness to kill the whole multitude with hunger</q>&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>Ex.</hi>
xvi. 3; also xiv. 11). They surely did not mean to say that Moses and Aaron
had <emph>carried</emph> the whole multitude out of Egypt <emph>on their backs</emph>.</note> We need scarcely remark
that the priest would comply with this injunction whether
he himself in person removed the bullock, or whether he employed
the Levites to do it; whether he carried it on his back,
according to the ridiculous paraphrase of Dr. Colenso, or removed
it in wagons provided for the purpose.
</p>

<p>
And now that our paper approaches to a close, it may be asked
what is the result of our labours, and what has been gained to the
cause of truth by all the minute and tedious details through
which we have conducted our readers? It seems to us that we
have directly answered two of Dr. Colenso's arguments, and that
we have moreover established indirectly a strong presumption
against all the rest. Let us put a case to our readers. A jeweller
exhibits for sale a string of pearls. He demands a very high
price, but he pledges his word of honour that the pearls are of
the rarest quality and of the highest excellence. A casual passer-by
is attracted by the glittering gems. He enters the shop; he listens
with eager credulity to the earnest protestations of the merchant;
but he hesitates when the price is named. At this critical
moment a friend arrives, who is happily somewhat versed in
jewellery. He selects one or two pearls from the string, and
after a brief inspection clearly shows, not merely that the price
is far beyond their value, but that they are not pearls at all.
What would be thought of the merchant who had offered them
for sale? Who would frequent his shop? Who would believe
<pb n='375'/><anchor id='Pg375'/>
the other pearls to be genuine on the strength of his protestations?
It may be indeed that he is not a swindler; but if he is
an honest man, he is certainly a very indifferent judge of his
business.
</p>

<p>
Now what this jeweller is in a matter of commerce, such, as it
seems to us, has Dr. Colenso been proved to be in a matter of
infinitely greater moment. He comes before the world with the
prestige of a great name and of a high position. He earnestly
announces that he has made a great discovery, and that he is
forced by his conscience to speak out his mind. He offers to the
public an attractive array of brilliant and plausible arguments;
and in return he asks us to surrender the inestimable treasure of
Christian faith. At first we are bewildered and perplexed by the
novelty and variety of his arguments; but after a little we summon
up courage; we select two or three from the number, and
these we submit to a minute and careful analysis. We find that
they are miserably defective and utterly inconclusive. Facts are
misrepresented, the meaning of language is perverted, the principles
of sound reasoning are disregarded. May we not then
fairly infer that Dr. Colenso's earnest protestations of sincerity
and good intention afford a very insufficient guarantee for the
accuracy of his statements and the stability of his arguments?
We do not say that he is dishonest; but we do say that he has
proved himself a very incompetent authority.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Blessed Thaddeus M'Carthy.</head>

<p>
[In an article of the <hi rend='italic'>Record</hi> for April (page 312), we briefly
referred to a Bishop of Cloyne and Cork who is venerated as
blessed, in Ivrea, a town of Piedmont. In conformity with the
few fragments preserved in the archives of Ivrea and elsewhere
regarding him, we adopted the opinion that his name, according
to modern orthography, should be rendered Thaddeus Maher.
Since the publication of the article just mentioned, a paper
containing much valuable matter has been communicated to us
through the great kindness of the Very Rev. Dr. M'Carthy,
the learned Professor of Scripture in Maynooth College, who
had prepared it long before the article in the <hi rend='italic'>Record</hi> was published,
and before he could have had any knowledge of our views
on this subject. We are anxious to publish every document that
we can find on this interesting question, in the hope that by discussing
it, light may be thrown on the history of a holy Irish
bishop, who is honoured beyond the Alps, but so little known
at home, that there is great difficulty in determining his real name.
In one of our next numbers we shall return to this subject.]
</p>

<pb n='376'/><anchor id='Pg376'/>

<p>
On June 23rd, 1847, the Most Rev. Dr. Murray, Archbishop of
Dublin, received at Maynooth a letter covering a bill of exchange
for £40 (1,000 francs), sent for the relief of the famine-stricken
poor of Ireland, by order of the good Bishop of Ivrea. The town
of Ivrea (anciently <hi rend='italic'>Eporedia</hi>) is the capital of the Piedmontese
province of the same name, which extends from the Po to the Alps.
The province contains a population of over one hundred thousand,
of whom about eight thousand reside in the town, where
is also the bishop's see.
</p>

<p>
The letter to Dr. Murray enclosed a separate paper, of which
the following is a copy:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>De Beato Thaddeo Episcopo Hiberniae.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Anno Domini millesimo quadringentesimo nonagesimo secundo,
die vigesima quarta Octobris, Eporediae (antiquae urbis
Transalpinae in Pedemontio) postremum obiit diem in hospitio
peregrinorum sub titulo Sancti Antonii, quidam viator incognitus;
atque eodem instante lux mira prope lectum in quo jacebat effulsit,
et Episcopo Eporediensi apparuit homo venerandus, Pontificalibus
indumentis vestitus. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Thaddeum Machar</hi> Hiberniae
Episcopum illum esse innotuit ex chartis quas deferebat, et in
Cathedrali ejus corpus solemni pompa depositum est sub altari,
et in tumulo Sancti Eusebii Episcopi Eporediensis, atque post
paucos dies coepit multa miracula facere.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Acta et documenta ex quibus ejus patria et character episcopalis
tunc innotuerunt, necnon ad patratorum miraculorum seu
prodigiorum memoriam exarata, interierunt occasione incendii
quo seculo xvii. Archivium Episcopale vastatum est. In quadam
charta pergamena caracteribus Gothicis scripta, quae in
Archivio Ecclesiae Cathedralis servatur haec leguntur:</q>
</p>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Marmoreis tumulis hoc templo Virginis almae</q></l>
<l>Corpora Sanctorum plura sepulta jacent</l>
<l>Martinus hic    .    .    .    .    .</l>
<l>.    .    .    .    .    .    .    .</l>
<l>Inde Thaddeus adest, quem misit Hibernia praesul</l>
<l>Sospite quo venit saepe petita salus,</l>
<l>Regia progenies alto de sanguine Machar,</l>
<l>Quem nostri in Genua nunc Latiique vocant.</l>
<l>Ingemuit moriens, quem Hiberno sidere cretum</l>
<l>Non Cariense tenet, non Clovinense solum.</l>
<l>Sic visum superis; urbs Eporedia corpus</l>
<l>Templo majore marmoreo claudat opus.</l>
<l>Hic jacet Eusebii testudinis ipse sacello,</l>
<l>Pauperiem Christi divitis inde tulit.</l>
<l>Hunc clarum reddunt miracula sancta: beatus</l>
<l>Exstat: et in toto dicitur orbe pius.</l>
<l>Huc quicunque venis, divum venerare Thaddeum</l>
<pb n='377'/><anchor id='Pg377'/>
<l>Votaque fac precibus: dicque viator, Ave.</l>
<l>Mille quadringentos annos tunc orbis agebat</l>
<l>Atque Nonagenos: postmodum junge duos.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Verbis illis <emph>solum Cariense</emph> vel <emph>Cloviense</emph> et <emph>Clovinense</emph> designari
a poeta civitates Hiberniae in quibus Thaddeus aut natus aut
Episcopus fuerit, putandum est, forsan Clareh, Carrick.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Quamobrem exquiritur utrum in Hibernia habeatur notitia
hujus Episcopi <hi rend='smallcaps'>Thaddei Machar</hi>&mdash;loci ubi natus fuerit,&mdash;ejus
familiae, quae regia seu princeps supponitur in poesi,&mdash;civitatis seu
ecclesiae in qua fuerit Episcopus. Desiderantur quoque notitiae
si quae reperiri poterunt et documenta quibus illius vita et gesta
illustrari possint; insuper utrum labente saeculo xv. aliqua
persecutio in Hibernia adversus Episcopos facta sit, quemadmodum
argumentari licet ex quibusdam Epistolis Innocentii VIII. circa
immunitatem ecclesiasticam</q>.&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>End of paper</hi>).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
As our space precludes a literal translation of this paper, a
summary may be acceptable to the reader.
</p>

<p>
On the 24th of October, 1492, died at Ivrea, in St. Antony's
Hospice for Pilgrims, Blessed Thaddeus, an Irish bishop, whose
body was deposited under the high altar of the cathedral, in a
shrine over the relics of the holy patron, St. Eusebius. At the
time of death a brilliant light was seen round his bed, and at the
same moment to the Bishop of Ivrea there appeared a man of venerable
mien, clothed in pontifical robes. Several other miracles
were also wrought through his intercession. The papers found
with him showed he was an Irish bishop, and these, as well as
other documents proving his great sanctity, religiously kept in
the episcopal archives, were destroyed by fire in the seventeenth
century. In an old parchment, written in Gothic letters, still
preserved in the archives of the cathedral church, are these
lines:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>'Neath marble tombs, in this the virgin's shrine</l>
<l>The bones of many a saint in peace recline;</l>
<l>Here martyred     .     .     .     .     .</l>
<l>Thaddeus there. From Erin's shore he came,</l>
<l>A bishop, of M'Carthy's royal name.</l>
<l>At whose behest were wondrous cures oft made.</l>
<l>Still Latium, Genoa, invoke his aid.</l>
<l>Dying, he mourned that not on Irish soil,</l>
<l>Where sped his youth, should close his earthly toil:</l>
<l>Nor Cloyne, nor Kerry, but Ivrea owns</l>
<l>(For God so willed) the saintly bishop's bones.</l>
<l>'T is meet that they in marble shrine encased</l>
<l>Should be within the great cathedral placed.</l>
<l>Like Christ, whose tomb was for another made,</l>
<l>He in Eusebius' cenotaph is laid.</l>
<pb n='378'/><anchor id='Pg378'/>
<l>Soon sacred prodigies his power attest,</l>
<l>And all the Earth proclaims him pious, blest.</l>
<l>O ye who hither come, our saint assail</l>
<l>With prayers and votive gifts; nor, traveller, fail</l>
<l>To greet with reverence the holy dead.</l>
<l>Since Christ was born a thousand years had fled,</l>
<l>Four hundred then and ninety-two beside</l>
<l>Had passed away, when St. Thaddeus died.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
When Dr. Murray received the Bishop of Ivrea's letter, he
placed it in the hands of the late venerated President of Maynooth
College, from whose MSS. it is now copied, together with
the very literal translation of the verses made by one of the
junior students at the time. Dr. Renehan undertook to collect all
the notices of Blessed Thaddeus in our Irish annals, and to give
the best answers he could to the bishop's questions. He even
visited Ivrea in the summer of 1850, in the hope of finding
traditional records of the life of Blessed Thaddeus, but to no purpose.
He found the task more difficult than might be expected.
All the knowledge regarding the saint's family, see, etc., that can
be gathered from Irish or British sources is found in these few
lines from Ware on the Bishops of Cloyne:
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend='smallcaps'>Thady M'Carthy</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>succ.</hi> 1490).&mdash;Upon the resignation of
William, Thady M'Carthy, by some called Mechar, succeeded
the same year by a provision from Pope Innocent VIII., as
may be seen from the <hi rend='italic'>Collectanea</hi> of Francis Harold</q>&mdash;Ware's
<hi rend='italic'>Bishops</hi> (Harris), p. 563.
</p>

<p>
The Blessed Thaddeus's name is unhonoured then, in his own
country; his biography, if ever written, is at least not recorded
by the Irish historians. Even the scanty information which the
industrious Ware supplies, was gleaned not from our annals, but
from Harold's <hi rend='italic'>Collectanea</hi>, probably notes and extracts taken
from documents in the continental libraries. Dr. Renehan had,
therefore, little to add on our saint's life. He was, however,
fully satisfied that Blessed Thaddeus of Ivrea was no other than
the Bishop of Cork and Cloyne, mentioned by Ware. His arguments
may be seen in a rough outline of his answer to the Bishop
of Ivrea's letter, among the O'Renehan MSS. in Maynooth,
almost the only authority we had time to consult for this notice.
Sometimes the very words of the letter are given in inverted
commas:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
I. The Pilgrim of Ivrea was an Irish bishop who died in the
year 1492. <q>The most diligent search through our Irish annals
will not discover another bishop to whom even so much of the
poet's description will apply but Thaddeus M'Carthy, Bishop of
Cloyne. About that date there were indeed in Ireland five
bishops named Thaddeus: 1. Thady, Bishop of Kilmore, since
<pb n='379'/><anchor id='Pg379'/>
before 1460; but his successor Furseus died in 1464, and Thomas,
the third from him, died before 1492. 2. Thady M'Cragh,
of Killaloe, succeeded in 1430, full sixty years before our
saint's death at Ivrea. His third successor died in 1460.
3. Thady, Bishop of Down, was consecrated in Rome, 1469,
died in 1486, and his successor, R. Wolsey, was named before
1492. 4. Thady of Ross died soon after his appointment in 1488,
succeeded by Odo in 1489. 5. Thady of Dromore, appointed only
in 1511, and the see was held by George Brown in 1492. The
date (1492) is alone enough to prove that B. Thaddeus of Ivrea
was not any of the preceding bishops, and there was no other of
the name for full sixty years after or before, but the Bishop of
Cork and Cloyne, the date of whose death fits exactly all the requirements
of the case. Ware quotes from Harold that he was
appointed by Innocent VIII. (<hi rend='italic'>sed.</hi> 1484-1492,) that he succeeded
W. Roch, resigned 1490, and further, that Gerald, who succeeded,
resigned in 1499, after obtaining a pardon from Henry
VII. in 1496</q>&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>Lib. Mun.</hi>, i. p. 102)
</p>

<p>
II. Another line of the old fragment seems to name the see of
the B. Thaddeus, whom the poet describes as lamenting his death
abroad, far from the <q>solum Chariense</q>, or <q>Clovinense</q>, which
we interpret far <q>from <emph>Kerry</emph></q>, the burial place of his family, and
<q>from <emph>Cloyne</emph></q>, his episcopal see. <q>Cloyne</q> is variously Latinized,
even by Irish writers, <q>Cloynensis</q>, <q>Clonensis</q>, <q>Cluanensis</q>&mdash;and
often <q>Clovens</q> or <q>Clovinen</q>, in Rymer's <hi rend='italic'>Foedera</hi>.<note place='foot'><q>Clove</q>=Cloyne, Rymer's <hi rend='italic'>Foedera</hi>. Tom. v. par. iv. p. 105; Lib. Mun.
Tom. i. par. iv. p. 102.</note> What
more natural than that a poet would describe the pilgrim as longing
to be buried either in his cathedral church of <emph>Cloyne</emph> or with his
fathers in <emph>Kerry</emph>?
</p>

<p>
III. The passage which seems to us most decisive, is that
which points to the <emph>royal extraction</emph> and <emph>name</emph> of this holy
bishop: <q><emph>Regia progenies, alto de sanguine Machar</emph></q>. Observe
how in the notice from <emph>Harold</emph> Bishop M'Carthy was
called also <q>Mechar</q>. Clearly both were one and the same
name. Thus [Gaelic: Mac Careaw], Anglicised M'Carthy, is pronounced
Maccaura, with the last syllable short, as in Ard-Magha
(Armagh), and numberless like words. Hence Wadding,<note place='foot'><q>Maccarthy=Carthy=Macare=Machar</q>. Wadd. Annal. Min. ad <hi rend='italic'>an.</hi> 1340,
n. 25, <hi rend='italic'>ed.</hi> Roman. Tom. viii. p. 241; <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> Tom. xiii. p. 432, et pp. 558-9.</note> in
speaking of the foundation of Muckross Abbey, Killarney, by
Domnal M'Carthy, Prince of Desmond, quotes to this effect a
Bull of Paul II., in 1468, in which Domnall's name is spelled
<q><emph>Machar</emph></q>, a form identical with that in the contemporary fragment.
In truth, there is no Irish family name like <q>Machar</q> at
all but <q>Meagher</q>, which is invariably spelled with <q>O</q>,
<pb n='380'/><anchor id='Pg380'/>
especially in the Latinized form; and the <q>O'Meaghers</q> had no
claim to <emph>royal</emph> blood.
</p>

<p>
IV. The Blessed Thaddeus was <q>regia progenies</q>. Now there
was no <emph>royal</emph> family name in Ireland like that in the inscription
except the truly <emph>royal</emph> name, made more royal still by the saintly
Bishop of Cloyne. Without insisting with Keating that the
ancestry of the M'Carthy family could be traced through twenty-eight
monarchs who governed the island before the Christian
era, we may assert with the Abbe MacGeoghan, in a note (tom.
iii. p. 680), strangely omitted by his translator, <q>that if regard
be had to primogeniture and seniority of descent, the M'Carthy
family is the <emph>first</emph> in Ireland</q>.
</p>

<p>
Long before the founders of the oldest royal families in Europe&mdash;before
Rodolph acquired the empire of Germany, or a Bourbon
ascended the throne of France&mdash;the saintly Cormac M'Carthy,
the disciple, the friend, and patron of St. Malachy, ruled over
Munster, and the title of <emph>king</emph> was at least continued in name
in his posterity down to the reign of Elizabeth. <q>Few pedigrees,
if any</q>, says Sir B. Burke, <q>in the British empire can
be traced to a more remote or exalted source than that of the
Celtic house of M'Carthy.... They command a prominent,
perhaps the <emph>most prominent</emph> place in European genealogy</q>. Plain
then is it that in no other house could the <q>regia progenies</q> be
verified more fully than in the M'Carthy family.<note place='foot'><q>Kings of the M'Carthy race</q>, Annals of Innisfallen, ad <hi rend='italic'>an.</hi> 1106, p. 106, <hi rend='italic'>an.</hi>
1108, 1110, 1176; Annals of Boyle, <hi rend='italic'>an.</hi> 1138, 1185; Annals of Ulster, <hi rend='italic'>an.</hi>
1022-3, 1124; Gir. Cambr., lib. i. cap. iii.; S. Bernard, in Vit. Malac., cap. iv.
<q>Their burial place</q>, Archdall Monast. Hib., pp. 302, 303.</note>
</p>

<p>
V. The date of death, the wished-for burial place, his native
soil (Kerry), or his diocese (Cloyne)&mdash;the name and royal
extraction, all point to the Bishop of Cloyne as the saint whose
relics are still worshipped at Ivrea. If we add that <q>Chiar</q> is the
usual Irish form of Kerry; that Domnall's (the founder of Irrelagh)
father's name was <hi rend='smallcaps'>Thaddeus</hi>, not improbably our Saint's
uncle, the evidence seems to be overwhelming.
</p>

<p>
VI. We have said there is no account in Irish writers of
even the Bishop of Cloyne, except the few lines in Ware. The
continental annalists of the religious orders do, however, speak
of one celebrated Thaddeus, without mentioning his surname
or country. Elsius (quoting <hi rend='italic'>De Herera</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Crusen</hi>, whose
works are not within our reach) notices Thaddeus <emph>de Hipporegio</emph>
sive <emph>Iporegia</emph>, <q>as a man distinguished for learning,
religious observance, preaching, holiness of life, and experience,
a man of great zeal, and a sedulous promoter of the interests of
his order</q>. He was prior, he adds, of several convents, seven
times definitor, thirteen times visitator, four times president of
synods, nine times vicar-general, and his government was ever
<pb n='381'/><anchor id='Pg381'/>
distinguished for the greatest love of order and edifying example.
See Els., <hi rend='italic'>Encom.</hi>, August., p. 645.
</p>

<p>
After quoting these words in substance from the Augustinian
chronicler, Dr. Renehan adds: <q>After the most diligent inquiry
I could make at Ivrea, wherever I could hope for any little
information, particularly at the episcopal palace (where I was
received with marked respect, as a priest from the country that
sent out the B. Thaddeus), and of the Bishop's secretary, the
vicar-general, and many others, whose kind attention I can never
forget, I could find no vestige of any other Thaddeus, called
after the city (<hi rend='italic'>Eporedia</hi>), but our own blessed Irish bishop;
and I was assured, over and over again, that he was the only
Thaddeus known in its annals, or who ever had any connection
with the town, by birth, residence, death&mdash;or any way known
to the present generation</q>. It is not then unreasonable to suppose
that the Thaddeus so celebrated in the Augustinian Order was
no other than our Bishop. True, Elsius gives 1502 for the date
of the friar's demise; but Elsius is never to be trusted in dates, and
the printer may easily take MCCCCXCII. (the true date), for
MCCCCCII. Indeed, 1492 is not so different from 1502
that an error may not have crept in.
</p>

<p>
Dr. Renehan's theory, then, with regard to B. Thaddeus, fully
detailed in the letter to the Bishop of Ivrea, was this:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
Thaddeus M'Carthy was born in Kerry, where the M'Carthy
More branch of the family resided, and where, in the monastery
of Irialac (now Muckross), or in Ennisfallen (see <hi rend='italic'>Archdall</hi>),
the princes of the house were always buried. The young Thaddeus
went abroad at an early age, and embraced the monastic
life. His virtues and piety soon attracted the notice of his
religious brethren, as manifest from their chronicles. They
became in time known to the ruling Pontiff, Innocent VIII.,
who raised him to the episcopal dignity. The B. Thaddeus
repaired to Rome in the first place, to receive consecration
and jurisdiction from the successor of St. Peter,
imitating in this the example of our great patron saint. He
stopped at Ivrea, probably on his way home, fell sick there,
and died, God witnessing to His servant by signs and wonders.
The silence of our annalists is thus accounted for to a
great extent by the long residence of B. Thaddeus abroad.
This theory is remarkably borne out by the independent notice
in last <hi rend='italic'>Record</hi>. Having little to help us to arrive at any correct
notion of the saintly bishop's life beyond the epitaph and
the slender tradition at Ivrea, we entirely subscribe to this view.
Other sources of information may be opened, now that we have
ventured to bring, for the first time, the name of B. Thaddeus
before the Irish Catholic people; and for this service, little as it
<pb n='382'/><anchor id='Pg382'/>
is, and entirely unworthy of our saintly bishop, we still expect
his blessing in full measure.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Liturgical Questions.</head>

<p>
We have received from various quarters several questions connected
with the ceremony of marriage. We propose in this number
of the <hi rend='italic'>Record</hi> to answer some of them.
</p>

<p>
We shall treat in the first place of the Mass. The questions
forwarded to us may be reduced to the two following:
</p>

<p>
1. When and on what days can the Missa pro sponso et sponsa
be said, and on what days is it forbidden by the Rubrics?
</p>

<p>
2. In either Mass are any commemorations to be made, and
when and how are they to be made?
</p>

<p>
In reply to these questions, we beg to bring under the notice
of our readers the following decrees of the Sacred Congregation
of Rites.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
4266. In celebratione Nuptiarum quae fit extra diem Dominicum
vel alium diem festum de praecepto seu in quo occurrat
duplex primae vel secundae classis etiamsi fiat officium et Missa
de Festo duplici per annum sive majori sive minori dicendam esse
Missam pro sponso et sponsa in fine Missalis post alias Missas
votivas specialiter assignatam: in diebus vero Dominicis aliisque
diebus festis de praecepto ac duplicibus primae et secundae classis
dicendam esse Missam de Festo cum commemoratione Missae pro
sponso et sponsa. Atque ita decrevit et servari mandavit. Die 20
Decembris 1783. Factaque deinde per me Secretarium de praedictis
Sanctissimo Domino Nostro Pio PP. VI. relatione Sanctitas
sua praefatum Sac. Cong. generale Decretum confirmavit, et
ubique exequutioni dandum esse praecepit. Die 7 Januarii 1784
</p>

<p>
4394. Verumtamen cum interea nonnulla excitata fuerint dubia
circa rubricam in haccelebranda Missa servandam, et Parochorum
sensus sit varius quippe quia aliqui eidem Missae Hymnum Angelicum
adjiciendum censent cum vers. Ite, Missa est in fine, alii
vero etiam Symbolum Nicenum legendum putant, ea freti ratione
quod haec Missa ceu solemnis et pro re gravi haberi debeat: ideo
ad amputandas controversias et dubitationes utque ab omnibus
unus idemque conveniens ritus servetur: sacra Rituum Congregatio,
me subscripto secretario referente, re mature discussa,
declaravit atque decrevit quod firma remanente dispositione
praefati Decreti quoad designationem dierum in quibus Missa
votiva pro sponso et sponsa celebrari potest, eamdem esse votivam
privatam, proindeque semper legendam sine Hymno Angelico
<pb n='383'/><anchor id='Pg383'/>
et symbolo Nicaeno cum tribus orationibus, prima videlicet
ejusdem Missae votivae propria ut habetur in fine Missalis secunda
et tertia diei currentis ut in Rubric. Tit. vii. num. 3, de Commemorationibus,
Benedicamus Domino in fine, et ultimo Evangelio
S. Johannis. Et ita decrevit die 28 Februarii 1818.
</p>

<p>
4437. Cum per Decretum Generale S. hujus Congregationis
die 20 Decembris 1783 dies designentur, quibus Missa pro sponso
et sponsa etiam diebus excludentibus duplicia per annum, ideoque
etiam infra octavam Epiphaniae, in vigilia Pentecostes, et
infra octavam privilegiatam sanctissimi Corporis Christi: alii vero
putant his etiam diebus eamdem Missam vetitam; idcirco idem
Parochus petiit declarari.
</p>

<p>
5. An hujusmodi Missa dici possit diebus duplicia excludentibus
ut supra notatis?
</p>

<p>
6. An Commemoratio Missae pro sponso et sponsa dicenda
prout ex dicto decreto in Missis de duplici primae vel secundae
classis dici debeat sub unica conclusione cum oratione Festi vel
sub altera conclusione?
</p>

<p>
7. An talis Commemoratio pariter dici debeat vel sub altera
conclusione prout solet de aliis commemorationibus occurrentibus
in diebus Dominicis et Festis de praecepto?
</p>

<p>
8. Quo loco, quando aliae occurrunt commemorationes ut in
proximo quaesito commemoratio Missae pro sponso et sponsa
dicenda sit sub secunda conclusione, an scilicet ultimo loco?
</p>

<p>
Et S. Rituum Congregatio exquisita sententia alterius ex
Apostolicarum Caeremoniarum Magistris scripto exarata, typisque
evulgata ad relationem Eminentissimi et Reverendissimi D. Card.
Cavalchini Ponentis, respondendum censuit ut infra, videlicet.
</p>

<p>
Ad 5. Negative quoad octavam Epiphaniae, vigiliam Pentecostes,
et octavam privilegiatam Sanctissimi Corporis Christi,
quatenus privilegium concessum sit ad instar octavae Epiphaniae.
</p>

<p>
Ad. 6. Negative ad primam partem, affirmative ad secundam.
</p>

<p>
Ad. 7. Ut in antecedenti.
</p>

<p>
Ad. 8. Faciendam primo loco post alias de praecepto.
</p>

<p>
Atque ita respondit die 20 Aprilis 1822.
</p>

<p>
From these decrees the following conclusions may clearly be
established:
</p>

<p>
1. On all Sundays and holidays of obligation, and feasts of
first and second class, the Mass of the day is to be said with the
commemoration of the Mass pro sponso et sponsa. This appears
clear from the decree 4266 quoted above.
</p>

<p>
2. This commemoration is to be made sub altera conclusione,
and not sub unica conclusione cum oratione Festi.
</p>

<p>
3. If there are other commemorations to be made in the Mass
of the day, they are to be said before the commemoration of the
Mass pro sponso et sponsa. This appears from the answer given
<pb n='384'/><anchor id='Pg384'/>
by the Sacred Congregation of Rites to the question 8 in the
Decree No. 4437, and Gardellini, in a note on this same
question, says: <q>Imo si occurrant plures commemorationes ut
accidit potissimum dum celebranda est Missa de Dominica, illa
Nuptiarum primum dumtaxat locum obtinere poterit post alias a
rubrica praeceptas et sic reliquas praestare, siquae sint a superiore
imperatae</q>.
</p>

<p>
4. The decree 4394 makes it clear that on all the ordinary
doubles throughout the year, the Missa pro sponso et sponsa may
be celebrated; and it declares, moreover, that it is a votive private
Mass, and, as such, to be said sine Gloria et Credo, with the
second and third prayers of the day occurring, and to conclude
with the Benedicamus Domino and the Gospel of St. John. This
decree, clear as it may appear, gave rise to another question about
privileged octaves which exclude doubles, which was afterwards
proposed to the Sacred Congregation of Rites, and to which an
answer was given on the 20th April, 1822, in the Decree 4437,
already quoted, question 5.
</p>

<p>
Gardellini, in a valuable note, explains the matter fully, and
we quote his words on the subject:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q>Hisce decretis compositae quaestiones omnes videbantur: secus
tamen accidit, nam nova excitata sunt dubia. Quippe nonnulli
sunt, qui opinantur Missam hanc dici posse etiam diebus qui excludunt
duplicia per annum, praesertim vero infra octavam Epiphaniae,
in vigilia Pentecostes et infra octavam privilegiatam sanctissimi
Corporis Christi. In hac autem opinione versantur quia in
primo illo Decreto dies isti expressim et nominatim non excipiuntur.
Ast hi errant quam maxime. Non enim declaratione indigebat
id, quod sub generali prohibitione, utpote a Rubricis jam
vetitum continebatur. Jubet Decretum, ne Missa nuptiarum celebretur
in duplicibus primae vel secundae classis sed vult ut in
hujusmodi occursu solam obtineant commemorationem: ergo
includit in regula etiam dies, in quibus per easdem Rubricas fieri
nequit Festum duplex secundae classis vel occurrens vel translatum
si in octava Epiphaniae duplicia isthaec non admittuntur,
potiori jure nec Missa votiva privata non obstante Indultu admitti
poterit, utpote quae in occursu hujusmodi duplicium celebranda
non est</q>.
</p>

<p>
We must refer our readers to this very instructive note of
Gardellini, which we regret we cannot insert here in full, owing
to its great length. Indeed it is not necessary to do so, inasmuch
as the answer given to the question 5 in the Decree 4437, already
quoted, puts an end to further discussion, and settles the question
definitively.
</p>

<p>
There are other questions connected with the ceremony of
marriage, but we must reserve them for another occasion.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='385'/><anchor id='Pg385'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Correspondence.</head>

<div>
<head>I. The See Of Down And Connor.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>To the Editors of the Irish Ecclesiastical Record</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Gentlemen</hi>,
</p>

<p>
In the March number of your valuable periodical there was
a most interesting paper on the See of Down and Connor. I
apprehend, however, it contained a few slight mistakes, which I
would have pointed out, but hoped that some person more intimately
conversant with the subject would have done so in your
April number. Such not having been the case, I shall endeavour
to do so. However, before entering on these matters, I beg to
say, in illustration of your learned contributor's notes, that the
<q><hi rend='italic'>Ecclesia de Rathlunga</hi></q>, of which Bishop Liddell had been
rector, is now called Raloo, and lies between Larne and Carrickfergus,
in the county of Antrim (see Reeves, p. 52); that <hi rend='italic'>Lesmoghan</hi>,
of which Bishop Killen had been pastor, still bears the
same name, forming a sub-denomination of the parish of Ballykinler,
county Down (Ib., p. 28); that <hi rend='italic'>Arwhyn</hi>, of which John of
<hi rend='italic'>Baliconingham</hi> (now Coniamstown, near Downpatrick) was
rector, is now the mensal parish of Ardquin, in the barony of
Ardes, county Down (Ib., p. 20); and that <hi rend='italic'>Camelyn</hi>, of which
Bishop Dongan was pastor, is now called Crumlin, being united
to the parish of Glenavy, near Lough Neagh, county Antrim
(<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>, p. 4). Returning from this digression, it is quite plain from
the Bull dated June, 1461, given by De Burgo (<hi rend='italic'>Hib. Dom.</hi>, p.
474), and cited by your contributor, p. 267, appointing Richard
Wolsey to the See of Down, that Wolsey was not the immediate
successor of Bishop John, who died in 1450. It expressly states,
as mentioned in the article, that the See was <emph>vacant</emph> by the death
of <hi rend='smallcaps'>Thomas</hi>, last bishop of the canonically united dioceses of Down
and Connor, repeating the same name in the body of the Bull.
How this is to be reconciled with the statement that Wolsey was
John's successor, I cannot say; but it follows, on the principle
laid down by your contributor in ignoring John Logan, placed
by Ware between William, bishop from 1365 to 1368, and
Richard Calf II., 1369, that we must have a Bishop Thomas between
John and Richard Wolsey. Dr. Reeves (<hi rend='italic'>Eccl. Ant.
Down</hi>, etc., p. 257), on the authority of this very Bull, has
accordingly done so, marking him as succeeding in 1450, and
<pb n='386'/><anchor id='Pg386'/>
the see vacant in 1451. He conjectures him to have been
<hi rend='italic'>Thomas Pollard</hi>, who in 1450 was appointed custose of the
temporalities. Dr. Cotton (vol. iii. p. 201) adopts this view
without hesitation, and it would appear by a complaint of the
beforementioned Bishop John, shortly after the union of Down
and Connor in 1441, that even then Pollard claimed to have
an apostolical provision for the See of Down (Primate Mey's
<hi rend='italic'>Registry</hi>, cited by Reeves, p. 37; see also Harris's <hi rend='italic'>Ware</hi>, p. 203,
where it is likewise mentioned that Pollard contested the See
of Down with John of Connor, both carrying themselves as
bishops thereof, Harris adding that it was thought Pollard was
supported by the primate, and that it was only in 1449 Pollard
lost his cause, just two years before Wolsey's appointment).
It may be asked, had he a reversionary provision before the union
was canonically effected? If not, is <emph>Thomas</emph> a misprint for <emph>John</emph> in
the Bull? as we are aware that there are many typographical
errors in the <hi rend='italic'>Hib. Dom.</hi>&mdash;for instance, as to <emph>John</emph> O'Molony,
Bishop of Killaloe, who died circ. 1650, is in several places
called <emph>Thomas</emph>.
</p>

<p>
The next bishop respecting whom I wish to make some
observations is Eugene or Owen Magenis, appointed in 1541,
and though I am not disposed to deal uncharitably with him, I
have no doubt he was a <q>temporiser</q>, though he may have been
secretly <q>orthodox</q>. Dr. M'Carthy (Dr. Kelly's <hi rend='italic'>Essays</hi>, p. 427),
and Brennan, and Walsh, in their ecclesiastical histories of Ireland
are compelled to come to the same conclusion; and upon
the whole of his career I candidly confess I don't know what
other result they could arrive at. I ground nothing on his being
present, if he were present, at Queen Elizabeth's first parliament
in 1560, which passed the Act of Uniformity, and required the
oath of supremacy to be taken by all ecclesiastics; for even if he
had been present, there is no documentary evidence extant
showing how those in attendance voted, and those acquainted
with Irish history know on the authority of Archdeacon Lynch
that these acts were hurriedly and surreptitiously passed on a day
when they were not expected to be brought forward, and in a
thin packed house. But it appears, so far as his public acts are reported,
that he submitted in matters of ecclesiastical discipline to all
the rapid changes and schisms which the fertile imaginations of the
pseudo-reformers introduced during the Tudor reigns. He surrendered
his bulls to Henry VIII., obtained from Paul, <q>Bishop
of Rome</q>, not <q>His Holiness</q>; took out pardon for accepting
them, with a new grant of the see, with the archdeaconry and confirmation
of the parishes of Aghaderg and Anaghlone, parishes to
which <emph>he had been</emph> promoted by the Primate in 1526 and 1528.
It is an oversight to suppose that about 1541 and 1543 the
<pb n='387'/><anchor id='Pg387'/>
northern chieftains who submitted to Henry VIII. were exempted
from all pressure in matter of religion. Cox (<hi rend='italic'>Aug. Hib.</hi>,
vol. i. p. 272) writes that the king about that time caused all the
Irish who submitted to him to renounce the <q>Pope's usurpations,
and to own the king's supremacy by indenture</q>, among others,
stating that O'Neill did so, January, 1542, all the indentures
being registered in the Red Book of the Exchequer. The
articles of Con O'Neill's submission are printed in vol. iii.
part iii. p. 353, of the <hi rend='italic'>State Papers of Henry VIII</hi>.; and by
the second article, he expressly renounces obedience to the
Roman Pontiff and his usurped authority, and acknowledges the
king to be the supreme head of the Church in England and
Ireland, immediately under Christ. Manus O'Donnell, 3rd
June the preceding year, in his letter styles the king on
Earth immediately under Christ supreme head of the Church of
England&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>, p. 217). M'Donell, captain of the galloglasses,
goes further, and promises to annihilate and relinquish the
usurped authority of the Bishop of Rome; and his adherents and
abettors will expel, extirp, and diminish, etc.&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>, p. 383).
Redmond MacMahon, captain of the Farney, 30th December,
1543, also renounces the usurped authority of the Roman
Pontiff&mdash;(Shirley's <hi rend='italic'>Farney</hi>, p. 40). Even in the reign of Queen
Mary, we find Owen Macgenis, of Iveagh, chief of his sept and
captain of his country, binding himself not to admit any provisions
from Rome, but oppose them all he could&mdash;(Cox, i.
p. 299). No doubt these indentures were extorted by necessity
from these chiefs, who scoffed at the idea that Henry had any
religion or was the head of any church, and kept the articles
just as long as they could not help it. Dr. M'Carthy, I presume
on the ground of Bishop Magenis suing out pardon in Queen
Mary's reign, considers he afterwards <q>repented</q>, being made a
privy councillor and governor of his country; but then we have
two similar acts of repentance in Elizabeth's reign, for he took
out the royal pardon, 1st May and 25th October in her first
year, thus atoning for his folly in her predecessor's. If he
lived till 1564, as Dr. Moran (<hi rend='italic'>Archbishops of Dublin</hi>) supposes&mdash;though
I consider he was dead in 1563, from the queen's
letter, dated 6th January, 1564, naming James M'Caghwell
to the see, then <q>destitute of an incumbent</q>, and also from the fact
of Shane O'Neill applying for the see for his brother, 1563-4&mdash;then,
knowing that the greater parts of the counties of Down
and Antrim were, in the early years of Elizabeth's reign, completely
under subjection to the English, and coupling this with
the solicitation of the royal pardons, the least that can be said
is, that Bishop Magenis acquiesced in or tacitly submitted to the
ecclesiastical changes enacted in the parliament of 1560, not
<pb n='388'/><anchor id='Pg388'/>
forgetting that about the same time Andrew Brereton, governor
of Lecale (called Britton by Anthony Bruodin, in Dr. Moran's
<hi rend='italic'>Archbishops of Dublin</hi>, p. 142), mercilessly strangled John
O'Lochran and two other Franciscan friars, in Downpatrick.
But I have reserved for the last the conduct of Bishop Magenis
in the reign of Edward VI. On the 2nd of February, 1552-3,
he assisted George Brown of Dublin in <emph>consecrating</emph> Hugh
Goodacre to be Archbishop of Armagh, and <emph>John Bale</emph> to be
Bishop of Ossory, according to a new-fangled form annexed to
the second Book of Common Prayer of Edward VI., which
was not even authorised by act of parliament, nor by any order
of the king (Mant, vol. i. p. 219)&mdash;as an Erastian church would
require&mdash;which was opposed by the Catholic clergy at the time,
and afterwards, in the reign of Queen Mary, condemned by all
the Catholic bishops of England as invalid, defective in matter,
form, and intention. And who was this John Bale whom Bishop
Magenis assisted in <emph>consecrating</emph> by this vitiated rite? He, according
to Pits, as quoted by Harris (Ware's <hi rend='italic'>Bishops</hi>, p. 417), was
<q>an English Heretick, an apostate Carmelite, and a married priest.
This poor wretch, except his calumnies against men and his
blasphemies against God and his saints, hath nothing in him
worthy to be taken notice of</q>. Condemned by his brother
Protestants, Vossius, Wharton, etc., for his acrimony and falsehood,
it is little wonder the Catholics, on the death of Edward
VI., chased him from Kilkenny. Had his <q>King Johan: a
play, in two parts</q>, published by the Camden Society in 1838,
been known in his lifetime, in which drama he apotheosises that
merciless tyrant, alike despicable, cruel, and infamous, the
murderer of his own nephew, as a great reformer, <q>the model of
every virtue, human and divine</q>, it would have completed his
infamy and disgrace. No earthly fears should have prevailed on
an orthodox bishop to pretend to consecrate a man whose life was
such a disgrace to religion. I do not lay much stress on the
formal words of the Bull appointing Myler Magrath to these
sees, 12th October, 1565, vacant <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>per obitum Eugenii Magnissae</foreign>:
it simply shows he was not deposed, and it may have been with
him as with his successor, that hopes were entertained for some
years that he would abandon his state conformity, which I trust
was the case. The astute and wily ministers of Elizabeth at this
early date did not compel apostacy, nor seek for purity of morals;
though apostates themselves, all they required was outward conformity,
that the elect should take investiture from the crown.
They bided their time.
</p>

<p>
It is questionable but that Sir James Ware knew Bishop
Dougan had been Bishop of Soder and Man, for in one of his
MSS. in Trinity College Library, cited by Reeves, p. 177, he
<pb n='389'/><anchor id='Pg389'/>
writes of John Duncan, Archdeacon of Down, in 1373, <q>Factus
Episcopus Sodorensis sive Insular. Manniar, 1374</q>; the different
spelling of the name, and the great age Dr. Dougan must have
attained before his elevation to Down in 1394 (living till 1412),
may have induced him to doubt the identity.
</p>

<p>
I am delighted to learn that we are to have these valuable
papers with others on the succession of the Irish sees, published
in a separate volume; and were I permitted to offer a suggestion,
I would recommend that the succession should be brought down
to the period of the Confederation of Kilkenny, when all the sees,
with the exception of Derry and Dromore, were, I think, full.
Enriched with a few biographical notes, such a work would be
a valuable accession to Irish ecclesiastical history, and would, besides,
utterly shatter the vain and fanciful theories of Mant,
Palmer, etc., as to apostolical succession through the puritanical
Adam Loftus, the apostate rector of Outwell, in Norfolk, to
which he had been appointed in 1556&mdash;(Cotton's <hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>, v. p.
197).
</p>

<p>
I omitted to ask if it can be explained why Myler Magrath,
in his letter of 24th June, 1592, given <hi rend='italic'>in extenso</hi> by Father
Meehan in Duffy's <hi rend='italic'>Hib. Magazine</hi>, March, 1864, calls, <q>Darby
Creagh</q>, Bishop of Cloyne, his cousin. Dermot or Darby Creagh,
or Gragh, or MacGragh, or M'Grath&mdash;for by these various names
he is called, is stated in the paper on Cork and Cloyne in your
last number to be a native of Munster; whereas Myler Magrath
was eldest son of Donogh, otherwise Gillagmagna Magrath, of
Termon Magrath, county of Fermanagh, of which the family had
been erenachs. He married Anne O'Meara, by whom he had
five sons&mdash;Terence, alias Tirlagh, Redmond, Barnaby, <hi rend='italic'>alias</hi> Brien,
Mark, and James, besides two daughters, Cecily or Sheelagh,
married to Philip O'Dwyer, and Eliza or Ellis, married to Sir
John Bowen. How came the relationship? I don't understand
why Myler is named as the foster-brother of the great
Shane O'Neill. The latter was fostered by the O'Donnellys of
Tyrone, and hence frequently styled Shane Donnellagh. Terence
Donnelly, alias Daniel, Dean of Armagh, was his foster-brother.
</p>

<p>
J. W. H.
</p>

<p>
April 8, 1865.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>II.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>To the Editors of the Record</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Gentlemen</hi>,
</p>

<p>
The following remarks on a subject of great importance to the
priests of the mission may not be uninteresting to the readers of
the <hi rend='italic'>Record</hi>. My attention was directed to the matter on reading
the erudite work of Dr. Feye, of Louvain, on Matrimony.
</p>

<pb n='390'/><anchor id='Pg390'/>

<p>
The opinions of St. Liguori are looked upon as possessing high
authority, and, as every one knows, very justly so. Hence it is
that he is copied even in the casual mistakes he made; and all the
casuistical works recently published have inserted in their pages
those mistakes. Take, for example, the works on moral theology
most in circulation at present, such as the works of Gousset,
Gury, Scavini, and it will be found that in the very latest editions
of these works those errors are left untouched.
</p>

<p>
At page 591, n. 876, of Gury, 13<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>a</hi> ed., it is remarked regarding
the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gradus inaequalis consanguinitatis, vel affinitatis</foreign>, that for
the validity of the dispensation it is not required to mention in the
petition the <emph>gradus remotior</emph> <q>nisi sint conjuncti secundo gradu
attingente primum</q>. In the <q>Casus Conscientiae</q> he makes the
very same observation. If the reader refer to Scavini he will find
the same opinion adopted. It will appear from the remarks of
Card. Gousset, t. 2, n. 1136, that he adheres to the opinion of St.
Liguori.
</p>

<p>
At page 118, l. 6, t. 6, n. 1136, St. Liguori treats of the
question, and cites the Breve of Benedict XIV., <q>Etsi Matr.</q>, of
27th September, 1755, upon which he remarks, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Matrimonium
esse quidem illicitum sed non invalidum modo propinquitas non
sit 1<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>mi</hi> aut 2<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>di</hi> gradus consanguinitatis</foreign></q>.
</p>

<p>
Now it is certain that Benedict XIV. held no such opinion, for
in sec. 6 he expressly states, after St. Pius V., that the omission of
the first grade <emph>alone</emph>, in the petition for dispensation, <emph>invalidates</emph>
the dispensation. Again, Benedict XIV. in that Breve is speaking
<emph>de duplici</emph> gradu consanguinitatis, not <emph>de secundo gradu</emph>, and states
that a dispensation would be null, in the petition for which only
one vinculum was expressed, whereas there existed two&mdash;duplex
vinculum.
</p>

<p>
I believe St. Liguori was led into the mistake either by confounding
the word <emph>duplex</emph> with <emph>secundum</emph>, or by the remarks
made by Benedict <emph>de tertio</emph> gradu propinquiore, etc., of which
there was question.
</p>

<p>
Gury's opinion also is wrong; for it is certain, from the decree
of St. Pius V., as cited and confirmed by Benedict XIV., that
the suppression of the mention of the first grade in the petition for
dispensation in <emph>gradu inaequali consang. off.</emph>, will equally annul
the dispensation, whether the first grade concur with the second,
third, or fourth.
</p>

<p>
In order then that St. Liguori's opinion be correct, it is necessary
to erase the words <q>aut secundi</q> from the sentence.
</p>

<p>
Expecting you will give insertion to the foregoing observations,
which are made through a desire to serve the <hi rend='italic'>Record</hi>, and give a
hint to fellow-labourers in the vineyard,
</p>

<p>
I remain, Gentlemen, respectfully yours,
</p>

<p>
W. Rice, C.C., Coachford.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='391'/><anchor id='Pg391'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Documents.</head>

<div>
<head>I. Letter Of The Cardinal Prefect Of Propaganda
To Dr. Troy, 1782.</head>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Illustrissimo e Reverendissimo Monsignore Come Fratello.
</p>

<p>
Essendosi prese in matura considerazione le risoluzioni emanate
dall'Assemblea de' Vescovi Suffraganei di cod. Provincia Armacana
radunata in Drogheda il di 8. e 9. Agosto dell'anno scorso; questa
S. Cong. di Propaganda dopo un lungo esame hà finalmente coll'oracolo
di Nostro Sig. PP. Pio VI. pronunziato il suo guidizio sù le
medesime e ne communica specialmente a V S. come amministratore
di cod. Metropolitana le sue determinazoni, perchè le faccia ben
tosto partecipi ai Prelati sudetti. Si è in primo luogo pertanto riconosciuto,
che a quest'assemblea non può darsi il nome di Sinodo Provinciale,
essendo essa mancante di tutte quelle solennità, e forme che ai
sinodi convengono, e specialmente dell'intervento del Capitolo della
Chiesa Metropolitana, che dee sempre ai sinodi invitarsi, quando un
immemorabile consuetudine non abbia a questo privilegio del Capitolo
derogato. Mà quantunque non si possa dare a quest'adunanza
de' Vescovi il carattere, e il vigore di sinodo provinciale, contuttociò la
pubblicazione delle risoluzioni prese nella med. non potea farci senza il
consenso, e approvazione della Sede Apostolica, poichè per i Decreti
eziandio de' sinodi provinciali legittimamente convocati, e canonicamente
tenuti, si chiede sempre, e si preserva l'approvazione della S.
Sede prima di esiggerne l'esservanza. L'esempio solo di S. Carlo
Borromeo in tutti i sei Sinodi Provinciali di Milano può dar norma
ai Vescovi come debbano regolarsi sù questo punto.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
E incominciando dalla terza risoluzione emanata dai Vescovi sudetti
questa è sembrata assai ambigua, ed oscura. La dispensa de' proclami
per celebrare un matrimonio secreto può concedersi cosi dall'Ordinario
dell'uomo, che della donna, e si concede di fatti da quello,
nella di cui Diocesi si contrae il matrimonio, siasi Ordinario dell'uno,
o dell'altro de contraenti. Se dunque si è preteso di limitare questa
facoltà al solo Ordinario dell'uomo, privandone l'Ordinario della
donna, questa risoluzione non dee osservarsi, poichè è contraria ad
ogni ragione canonica, e all'osservanza. Se poi si è voluto soitanto
intendere, che dopo essersi ottenuto questa dispensa dall'Ordinario
dell'uomo, non faccia d'uopo di riportarla ancora da quello della
donna allora la risoluzione potrà eseguirsi, e non merita riprensione.
</p>

<p>
La quarta però non ammette interpretazione, e debbe essere per
ogni conto proscritta. Si è risoluto, che ogni dispensa dai gradi proibiti
di parentela sia concessa dall'Ordinario di ciascuna parte contraente.
Dovevano pur i Vescovi riflettere, che essendo la parentela
un vincolo, che lega due persone, e impedisce, che trà loro si possa contrarre
<pb n='392'/><anchor id='Pg392'/>
il matrimonio; subito che una di esse èsciolta da questo vincolo,
ne viene in conseguenza, che ne sia prosciolta anche l'altra, non
potendo restarne avvinta una, e libera l'altra. Se dunque per
autorità legittima, o della Sede Apostolica, o di uno degli Ordinarj
è tolto il vincolo di parentela trà un uomo, e una Donna, non vi è
più bisogno di altra dispensa, ne fà, mestieri ricorrere all'altro Ordinario
per ottenerla. . . . . . . Prego il Signore che La
conservi e feliciti.
</p>

<p>
Roma 30 Marzo 1782.
</p>

<p>
D. V. S.
</p>

<p>
Come Fratello,<lb/>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>L. Card. Antonelli</hi>, Prefetto,<lb/>
Stefano Borgia, <hi rend='italic'>Segretario</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Mons. Troy, Vescovo Ossoriense.
</p>

<p>
Amministretore di Armach.
</p>

<p>
[<hi rend='smallcaps'>translation.</hi>]
</p>

<p>
Having taken into its careful consideration the resolutions adopted
at a meeting of the Suffragan Bishops of the Province of Armagh,
held last year at Drogheda, on the 8th and 9th of August, this S.
Congregation of Propaganda, by authority of our Lord Pope Pius
VI., after a protracted examination, has finally given judgment thereupon.
This judgment it now signifies to your lordship, as Administrator
of that Metropolitan See, in order that you may speedily
communicate to the above-mentioned Prelates the decision which it
has been led to take. First of all, however, it has been established
that the meeting cannot be called a provincial synod, seeing that it
wanted all the formalities prescribed for the holding of synods, and
especially the presence of the Metropolitan Chapter, which, when
immemorial usage to the contrary has not interfered with its right,
ought always to be invited to synods. But although this meeting
of bishops may not claim the character or the authority of a provincial
synod, nevertheless its resolutions could not be published without
the consent and approbation of the Apostolic See, since the decrees
even of provincial synods, lawfully convened and celebrated in
canonical form, require at all times the approbation of the Holy See
before their observance can be made obligatory. The example of
St. Charles Borromeo in the Six Provincial Synods of Milan, is of
itself a sufficient guide for Bishops in this matter.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
In the first place, then, the third resolution passed by the above-mentioned
Bishops appears very ambiguous and obscure. In case
of a private marriage, both the Ordinary of the man and the Ordinary
of the woman have power to dispense with the publication of the
banns, and as a matter of fact this dispensation is granted by the
Bishop in whose diocese the marriage is celebrated, whether he be
the Ordinary of the one or of the other of the contracting parties.
If, then, the sense of the resolution be to limit this power to the Ordinary
of the man, to the exclusion of the Ordinary of the woman, the
resolution ought not to be carried out, as being contrary to the canons
<pb n='393'/><anchor id='Pg393'/>
and to custom. But if, on the other hand, the meaning be, that
when once the dispensation has been obtained from the Ordinary of
the man, there is no need to obtain it also from the Ordinary of the
woman, the resolution thus interpreted may be put into practice, and
is not deserving of censure.
</p>

<p>
The fourth resolution, however, cannot be softened by any interpretation.
That resolution prescribed that every dispensation in
prohibited degrees of relationship should be granted by the Ordinary
of each of the contracting parties. And yet the Bishops ought to
have reflected that relationship being a bond which affects two
persons, and prevents them from contracting matrimony one with the
other, the moment one of these persons becomes free from this bond,
the other, by a necessary consequence, is also set at liberty, it being
impossible that one can be free whilst the other remains bound.
Whenever, therefore, the bond of relationship between a man and a
woman has been removed by lawful authority, either of the Holy
See or of one of the Ordinaries, no second dispensation is required,
nor is it necessary to have recourse to the other Ordinary to obtain
such dispensation....
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<head>II. Decrees Granting An Indulgence To A
Prayer To Be Said Before Hearing Confessions,
And To A Prayer For A Happy
Death.</head>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Oratio recitanda ante sacramentales confessiones excipiendas.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Da mihi Domine, sedium tuarum assistricem Sapientiam, ut sciam
judicare populum tuum in justitia, et pauperes tuos in judicio. Fac
me ita tractare Claves Regni Coelorum, ut nulli aperiam cui claudendum
sit, nulli claudam cui aperiendum sit. Sit intentio mea pura,
zelus meus sincerus, charitas mea patiens, labor meus fructuosus. Sit
in me lenitas non remissa, asperitas non severa, pauperem ne despiciam,
diviti ne aduler. Fac me ad alliciendos peccatores suavem, ad
interrogandos prudentem, ad instruendos peritum. Tribue, quaeso,
ad retrahendos a malo solertiam, ad confirmandos in bone sedulitatem,
ad promovendos ad meliora industriam: in responsis maturitatem, in
consiliis rectitudinem, in obscuris lumen, in implexis sagacitatem, in
arduis victoriam, inutilibus colloquiis no detinear, pravis ne contaminer,
alios salvem, meipsum non perdam. Amen.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Urbis et Orbis. Decretum.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Ex Audientia Sanctissimi. Die 27 martii 1854.&mdash;Ad preces humillimas
Reverendissimi Patris Jacobi Pignone del Carretto Clericorum
Regularium Theatinorum Praepositi Generalis, Sanctissimus
<pb n='394'/><anchor id='Pg394'/>
Dominus Noster Pius PP. IX. benigne inclinatus omnibus et singulis
Confessariis in Universo Orbe Catholico existentibus supraenunciatam
Orationem, antequam ad Sacramentales excipiendas Confessiones
assideant, corde saltem contrito, et devote recitantibus centum dierum
Indulgentiam semel tantum in die acquirendam, clementer est elargitus.
Praesenti perpetuis futuris temporibus valituro absque ulla
Brevis expeditione.
</p>

<p>
Datum Romae ex Secretaria S. Congregationis Indulgentiarum.
F. Card. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Asquinius</hi> praefectus&mdash;Loco ϯ Sigilli.&mdash;A. Colombo secretarius.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Oratio Caroli Episcopi Cracoviensis pro impetranda bona morte</hi>.
</p>

<p>
O Maria sine labe concepta, ora pro nobis, qui confugimus ad Te, o
refugium peccatorum, mater agonizantium, noli nos derelinquere in
hora exitus nostri, sed impetra nobis dolorem perfectum, sinceram
contritionem, remissionem peccatorum nostrorum, Sanctissimi Viatici
dignam receptionem, extremae unctionis Sacramenti corroborationem,
quatenus securi presentari valeamus ante thronum justi sed et misericordis
Judicis, Dei, et Redemptoris nostri. Amen.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Ex audientia Sanctissimi die 11 martii 1856</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Sanctissimus Dominus Noster Pius PP. IX. omnibus et singulis
utriusque sexus Christi fidelibus, qui corde saltem contriti, ac devote
supradictas pias preces, jam adprobatas, ab bonam mortem impetrandam
recitaverint, centum dierum Indulgentiam semel in die lucrifaciendam,
clementer est elargitus. Praesentibus, perpetuis futuris temporibus
valituris.
</p>

<p>
Datum Romae ex Secretaria Brevium.&mdash;L. ϯ S. Pro D. Cardinali
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Macchi</hi>.&mdash;Jo. B. Brancaloni Castellani <hi rend='italic'>Sub.</hi>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<head>III. Decree Concerning The Prayer <hi rend='italic'>Sacrosanctae
Et Individuae Trinitati, Etc.</hi></head>

<p>
Urbis et Orbis. Decretum. Cum Sacrae huic Congregationi Indulgentiis
Sacrisque Reliquiis praepositae in una Melden. inter alia exhibitum
fuisset dubium enodandum <q>An ad lucrandam Indulgentiam
vel fructum orationis <hi rend='italic'>Sacrosanctae et individuae</hi> etc. necessario flexis
genibus haec oratio sit dicenda, vel an saltem in casu legitimi impedimenti
ambulando, sedendo recitari valeat?</q> Eminentissimi Patres
in generalibus Comitiis die 5 Martii superioris anni apud Vaticanas
Aedes habitis respondendum esse duxerunt. <q>Affirmative ad primam
partem, negative ad secundam</q>. Facta itaque Sanctissimo Domino
Nostro Pio PP. IX. relatione per me infrascriptum S. Congregationis
Secretarium die 12 ejusdem mensis, Sanctitas Sua votum Eminentissimorum
Patrum approbavit. In audientia vero Sanctissimi die 12
<pb n='395'/><anchor id='Pg395'/>
Iulii ejusdem anni ab Eminentissimo Cardinali praefatae S. Congregationis
Praefecto habita, eadem Sanctitas Sua ex speciali gratia clementer
indulsit, ut Oratio <hi rend='italic'>Sacrosanctae</hi> etc. pro lucranda Indulgentia
a Sa. Mem. Leone PP. X. adnexa, seu fructu dictae orationis, etiam
non flexis genibus recitari possit ab iis, qui legitime impediti fuerint
infirmitatis tantum causa. Praesenti valituro absque ulla Brevis expeditione,
non obstantibus in contrarium facientibus quibuscumque.
</p>

<p>
Datum Romae ex Secretaria ejusdem S. Congregationis Indulgentiarum
die 7 januarii 1856.&mdash;Loco ϯ Signi.&mdash;F. Cardinalis <hi rend='smallcaps'>Asquinius</hi>,
Praef.&mdash;A. Colombo Secretarius.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>IV. Plenary Indulgences And The Infirm.</head>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>Decretum Urbis et Orbis. Ex Audientia Sanctissimi die 18 Septembris,
1862.</hi>&mdash;Est hoc in more positum quod ab animarum Pastoribus
Sanctissimum Eucharistiae Sacramentum in aliquibus tantum infra
annum praecipuis festivitatibus ad fideles habitualiter infirmos, chronicos,
ob physicum permanens aliquod impedimentum e domo egredi
impotentes solemniter deferatur, proindeque hujusmodi fideles tot
Plenariis Indulgentiis privantur, quas consequerentur si conditionibus
injunctis adimpletis ad Sacram Eucharisticam Mensam frequentius
possent accedere. Itaque quamplures animarum Curatores, aliique
permulti Ecclesiastici Viri humillimas preces porrexerunt Sanctissimo
Domino Nostro Pio PP. IX. ut de Apostolica benignitate super hoc
providere dignaretur, factaque per me infrascriptum Secretariae S.
Congregationis Indulgentiarum Substitutum Eidem Sanctissimo de
his omnibus fideli relatione in Audientia habita die 18 Septembris
1862, Sanctitas Sua spirituali gregis sibi crediti utilitati prospiciens
clementer indulsit, ut praefati Christi fideles, exceptis tamen illis
qui in Communitate morantur, acquirere possent omnes et singulas
Indulgentias plenarias jam concessas vel in posterum concedendas,
quasque alias acquirere possent in locis in quibus vivunt, si in eo
physico statu non essent, pro quarum acquisitione praescripta sit
Sacra Communio et visitatio alicujus Ecclesiae vel publici Oratorii
in locis iisdem, dummodo vere poenitentes, confessi, ac caeteris omnibus
absolutis conditionibus, si quae injunctae fuerint, loco S. Communionis
et Visitationis alia pia opera a respectivo Confessario
injungenda fideliter adimpleant. Praesenti in perpetuum valituro
absque ulla Brevis expeditione. Non obstantibus in contrarium
facientibus quibuscumque.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Datum Romae ex Secretaria S. Congregationis Indulgentiarum
et SS. Reliquiarum, Loco ϯ Signi <hi rend='italic'>F. Card. Asquinius</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Praefectus. A.
Archip. Prinzivalli Substitutus.</hi></q>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='396'/><anchor id='Pg396'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Notices Of Books.</head>

<div>
<head>I.</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Appendix ad Rituale Romanum</hi> sive Collectio Benedictionum et
Instructionum a Rituali Romano exsulantium, Sanctae Sedis
auctoritate approbatarum seu permissarum, in usum et commoditatum
Missionariorum Apostolicorum digesta. Romæ,
Typis S. Con. de Propagande Fide, 1864.
</quote>

<p>
This book has been compiled by authority, to serve as an
appendix to the Roman Ritual, and is intended for the convenience
of priests on the mission. In Ireland especially, where
the Catholic instincts of the people have ever maintained pious
confraternities in the honour which is their due, the clergy must
have felt the want of a manual containing the <foreign rend='italic'>formulæ</foreign> to be
used in enrolling the faithful in the various religious societies
approved by the Holy See. These forms are not to be found
in the Roman Ritual, nor in the books easily accessible to the
great body of priests. Besides, since every creature of God may
be blessed by prayer, the Catholic Church, whilst she refuses to
be reconciled with whatever is defective in modern progress,
hastens, on the other hand, to sanctify by her blessing whatever
this progress contains of good. Hence, new forms of prayer
are rendered necessary from time to time, such as the form for
blessing railways, and the Benedictio ad. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Omnia</hi>, to be used in
blessing all objects for which a special benediction is not contained
in the Roman Ritual. These forms are to be found in this
appendix. The instructions which the Holy See issues from
time to time on various subjects for the guidance of missionary
priests, also find their place in this collection. Among
them is the Instructio, issued by the Sacred Congregation of
Rites, for those who have permission to say two Masses on
the same day in different churches, and which is inserted in the
Ordo for use of the Irish clergy. To this is added, in the book
under notice, the ritus servandus a <emph>Sacerdote cum utramque
Missam in eadem Ecclesia offere debet</emph>. It runs as follows:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>Hoc itaque in casu Sacerdos post haustum in prima Missa diligenter
Sanguinem Domini, omissa consueta purificatione, patena
calicem et palla patenam tegens ac super corporale relinquens dicet
junctis manibus: <hi rend='italic'>Quod ore sumpsimus Domine</hi>, etc. Deinde digitos,
quibus SS. Sacramentum tetigit, in aliquo vase mundo ad hoc in
Altare praeparato abluet, interim dicens <hi rend='italic'>Corpus tuum Domine</hi>, etc.,
abstersisque purificatorio digitis calicem velo coöperiet, velatumque
ponet super corporale extensum. Absoluta Missa si nulle in Ecclesia
<pb n='397'/><anchor id='Pg397'/>
sit sacristia calicem eodem modo super Altare relinquet; secus vero
in Sacristiam deferet, ibique super Corporale vel pallam in aliquo
loco decenti et clauso collocabit usque ad secundam Missam, in qua,
cum eodem calice uti debeat, ilium rursus secum deferet ad Altare,
ac super corporale extensum reponet. Cum autem in secunda Missa
Sacerdos ad Offertorium devenerit, ablato velo de Calice hunc
parumper versus cornu Epistolae collocabit sed non extra corporale,
factaque hostiae oblatione cavebit ne purificatorio extergat calicem,
sed eum intra corporale relinquens leviter elevabit, vinumque et
aquam eidem caute imponet, ne guttae aliquae ad labia ipsius Calicis
resiliant, quem deinde nullatenus ab intus abstersum more solito
offeret.</q>
</quote>

<p>
The contents may be reduced to three heads. The first
regards the sacraments, and embraces a short form for blessing
the baptismal font; the rite of confirmation when administered
by a simple priest by delegation from the Apostolic See; instruction
for priests who duplicate; manner of carrying the
Eucharist in secret to the sick among unbelievers; decree of
the Sacred Congregation of Rites concerning the oil for the
lamp of the Blessed Sacrament. The second contains various
forms of blessing, twenty-two in number, and including those for
erecting the Via Crucis, and for enrolling in the scapulars of the
different orders. The third part contains the ceremonies appointed
by Benedict XIII. to be performed in the smaller parish
churches on the great festivals of the Christian year.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>II.</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Popular Objections against the Encyclical.</hi> By. Mgr. de Segur.
Authorized Translation. Dublin: John F. Fowler, 3 Crow
Street.
</quote>

<p>
We are delighted to welcome this little work, both for the
sake of its own proper merits, and because it is the first instalment
of the authorized translation of the admirable works of
Mgr. de Segur. The Encyclical and Syllabus still continue to
be the great event of the day. Indeed, as yet, we see only the
beginnings of the influence it is surely destined to exercise on
men's minds; and for the due development of that influence,
works like this of the French prelate are very necessary. The
docile Catholic, for whom St. Peter lives and speaks in Pius IX.,
will find set forth herein the majesty and beauty of the doctrine
he had before received in simple faith. The Catholic whose
mind has been coloured for good and evil by modern ideas, and
who has felt alarm at the apparent contradiction between the
teaching of the Pope and certain social doctrines he has long
held to be as sacred as first principles, will find in these pages
wherewith to calm his apprehensions and steady his judgment
<pb n='398'/><anchor id='Pg398'/>
He will see that what the Church condemns is already condemned
by reason and history; and that, far from placing under
the ban any of the elements of true progress, the Holy See
censures the very errors which make all true progress impossible.
The priest who has charge of the wise and the unwise together,
will be glad to have, in these few pages, what may enable him
to provide for the wants of both. We quote a few passages:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The Pope Condemns Liberty Of Conscience.
</p>

<p>
You mean to say <q>the liberty of having no conscience</q>, or, what
is much the same thing, <q>the liberty of corrupting or poisoning one's
conscience!</q> You are right; the Pope is the mortal enemy of a
liberty so shocking. What good father would leave his son the
liberty of poisoning himself?
</p>

<p>
It was Protestantism which invented, and it is the Revolution
which has perfected, what unbelievers call liberty of conscience. It
has become an essential part of <emph>progress</emph>, of that anti-Catholic <emph>progress</emph>
of which we were speaking just now, and which has insinuated
itself into all modern constitutions....
</p>

<p>
The liberty of following one's conscience, even when it is misguided,
is not the liberty of conscience condemned by the Encyclical Letter.
Catholics, Protestants, Jews, and all men, of whatever denomination
or sect they may be, are obliged to follow the dictates of their conscience;
as long as they are misled <emph>fairly</emph>, it is but a misfortune; what
the Church demands is that all men may escape this misfortune,
and have full liberty of embracing truth, when once they have discovered
it. The Pope condemns liberty of <emph>conscience</emph>, and not liberty
of <emph>consciences</emph>. The one is very different from the other.
</p>

<p>
In Condemning Liberty Of Worship, The Pope Wishes To Oblige
Governments To Persecute Unbelievers, Protestants, Jews.
</p>

<p>
The Pope desires nothing of all that, and those who say so, do not
believe a word of what they advance. Pius IX. says simply to
<emph>Catholic</emph> governments (and it is to them that he addresses himself):
<q rend='pre'>There is but one true religion, because there is but one God, one
Christ, one faith, one baptism, and this only true religion is that of
the Holy, Catholic, Apostolic Church of Rome. If, in consequence of
unfortunate circumstances, a Catholic government is obliged to put
the Church on the same footing with false religions, such as Protestants,
Jews, Mahometans, etc., it should bitterly regret such an unhappy
state of things, and never consider it as permanent or lasting.
Such conduct would be putting truth on a line with error, and despising
faith.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>It is the duty of a really Catholic government to facilitate, <emph>as much
as possible</emph>, to bishops and priests, the free exercise of their holy ministry,
in order that they may, by the zeal and persuasion of their
charity, work more efficaciously for the conversion of heretics and
other dissenters. It must hinder, <emph>as much as circumstances and the
laws of prudence will permit</emph>, the extension of heresy; finally, it must
<pb n='399'/><anchor id='Pg399'/>
endeavour, for its own interest, as well as for that of the Church, to
procure the inestimable advantages of religious unity and peace to
its subjects</q>.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
These are the matters that Pius IX. speaks of. He simply
engages Catholic sovereigns to do for their subjects what every good
father would do for his children and his servants; he does all in his
power to render the knowledge and practice of religion easy for
them; he removes as much as he can all that is capable of weakening
their faith or of corrupting their morals; he tolerates the evil that
he cannot prevent, but he never lets an opportunity pass without
blaming this evil, and repressing that which he cannot extirpate
entirely.
</p>

<p>
The Church employs gentleness and mildness in order to gain
souls to God. Who would have ever thought of using violent measures
to impose faith on men? Although the Catholic Church pities
those who are misguided, and does all in her power to enlighten
them, she respects their faith, when she knows them to be upright
and honest. Intolerant and absolute in matter of doctrine, she is
full of tender solicitude for her children.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>III.</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>St. Patrick's Cathedral: How it was Restored.</hi> By a Catholic
Clergyman. Dublin: Duffy, 1865
</quote>

<p>
Even in the days of St. Augustine, Catholic eyes had to
behold scenes somewhat similar to the one in view of which this
pamphlet has been written. Within churches once Catholic,
Donatist bishops at that time held high festival, in the midst of
solemn pomp, with mystic rite and sacred song. From episcopal
chairs erected in opposition to those of the prelates in communion
with the Roman Pontiff, <q><emph>that is to say</emph></q>, explains St.
Cyprian, <q><emph>with the Catholic Church</emph></q>, intruded bishops counterfeited
the preaching of the lawful pastors, and with many a text
from Holy Writ, and with a plentiful use of holiest names,
made a brave show of belonging to those whom the Holy Ghost
has placed to rule the Church of God. But the make-believe was
not successful. One glance at the religious system of these men
and at the Catholic Church was enough to reveal the hollowness
of their pretensions, notwithstanding the ecclesiastical
air they so studiously cultivated. Hence St. Augustine thus
writes about Emeritus, a Donatist bishop (for whom, perhaps,
some worthy layman, not averse from proselytizing poor Catholics
in the wild Numidian country about Cethaquenfusca, had restored
one of the old cathedrals), <q>Outside the pale of the Church
(Emeritus) may have everything except salvation. Honour he
may have, a sacrament he may have, he may sing <hi rend='italic'>alleluia</hi>, he
may answer <hi rend='italic'>amen</hi>, he may have the Gospel, he may both hold
<pb n='400'/><anchor id='Pg400'/>
and preach faith in the name of the Father and of the Son
and of the Holy Ghost; but nowhere save in the Catholic
Church shall he be able to find salvation</q>&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>Epist.</hi> clii.). And
yet, at least in the beginning, the Donatists were but schismatics;
their heresy was of somewhat later growth. How
much stronger, then, becomes St. Augustine's argument when
applied to the Established Church of our times, in which
heresy and free-thinking have ravaged whatever schism had
spared! The pamphlet under notice in reality does but
reëcho the holy Doctor's remarks. An outline of St. Patrick's
life and faith, drawn from unimpeachable authorities, sets
before us most clearly that the ancient Catholic Church of
Ireland differed far more from the Church now usurping
St. Patrick's Cathedral, than the ancient Catholic Church of
Africa from the Donatist body. The personal history of our
great apostle, his early training, his call to preach, his ecclesiastical
studies, his mission from Rome, his doctrine about
the Holy See, his essentially Catholic teaching, are all plainly
and forcibly Set forth, and contrasted with the peculiarities
of modern Protestantism. No candid mind can for a moment
hesitate to conclude with the writer, that the restoration ceremony
was <q>a ghastly spectacle of <emph>unreality</emph>. It was a joyous
revel over a <emph>lifeless</emph> form: the body was there, but not <emph>the soul</emph>.
The beauty of early years, which is oftentimes observed to resume
its place, in death, upon the face from which it had been
long driven by weeks, or months, or, perhaps, years of pain, the
beauty of graceful outline, and delicate feature, and placid, gentle
expression&mdash;all that had come back; and the church seemed as
if but yesterday finished. But the spirit of St. Patrick was not
there; the creed which he taught was not there; the <emph>true faith</emph>,
which is the soul, the animating spirit of religion, was far away</q>.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>IV.</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Vie et Institut de Saint Alphonse Marie de Liguori, Evêque de
Sainte Agathe des Goths, et Fondateur de la Congregation du
Tres-Saint Redempteur.</hi> Par son Eminence le Cardinal
Clement Villecourt, 4 vols. Tournai: Casterman, 1864.
</quote>

<p>
Of this excellent work we have only space to say at present
that it is worthy of its eminent author, and not unworthy of the
great saint whose life and virtues it sets forth. We hope to return
to the subject at a future time.
</p>

</div>

</div>

</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
